=head1 Add a Wallet Address to a DNS Record

Z<add_wallet_address_to_dns>

If you have a website, like U<https://ifdogethenwow.com/>, how can people find
you and send you a tip or a payment for something awesome you've done? You need
some way to associate a Dogecoin address with an Internet property.

X<concepts; DNS>

Fortunately, the Internet already has a well-understood mechanism to add this
kind of metadata to a domain name. It's the same way any device can turn that
domain name into an IP address or addresses to look up a web page, send email,
make an SSH connection, or do other things: DNS, the domain name system.

X<people; Timothy Stebbing>

At the inagural Dogecoin
hackathonN<U<https://foundation.dogecoin.com/announcements/2022-09-08-dogeathon-downunder/>>,
Timothy Stebbing showed off this ideaN<... and, inadvertently, kicked off the
writing of this book. Thanks, Timothy!>.

=head2 *How to Add a TXT Record

X<domain name>
X<domain name; TXT record>
X<domain name; DNS>

Assume you have a website. How do you allow people to send you tips? First,
generate a new, unique Dogecoin address (see L<replenish_your_address_pool>,
for example). Use the Dogecoin Core, C<libdogecoin>, or a non-custodial wallet
you trust. Keep the private key safe, as always.

Second, take a domain name you control. Maybe that's C<mycoolsite.example> or
something else. You've registered this through a domain registrar, and you have
the ability to configure DNS.

=begin tip Keep Your Domain Running!

If you didn't set up your own DNS, talk to the person or people who set it up
for you. If you edit this on your own and make a mistake, you could break your
website, email, or other network services associated with that domain.

=end tip

Go into your DNS configuration and add a `TXT` record. This is an arbitrary
text string associated with your domain name and propagated through the
globally-accessible, cached DNS system. For now, stick with the defaults of
I<which> DNS entry, TTL settings, et cetera.

X<BIPs; BIP-21>

The contents of this new record should be the literal string `dogecoin:` (yes,
include the colon) plus the new wallet address you generated, with no spaces in
between. This conforms to BIP-21N<See
U<https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0021.mediawiki>>, so other
applications can use this. Hold onto that thought.

Save the configuration and publish it. In a few minutes, when your DNS changes
propagate to the rest of the Internet, you'll be ready to go. Anyone will be
able to look up your domain name, find this new record, and do something with
this wallet address.

=begin tip Specific DNS Configuration Details See... Elsewhere

Looking for a visual explanation of how to do this? The process varies
depending on your domain registrar and DNS host. Again, this has the potential
to render your domain I<temporarily> unusable, so be cautious, read the
documentation, and ask for help if you need it.

=end tip

=head2 *Understand the Risks

At this point in the book, you should be a little bit wary of the words
I<anyone> and I<something>, because publishing an address like this means
anyone can do I<anything> with both the address and the knowledge that the
address is associated with the domain name.

X<< external programs; C<whois> >>

DNS entries often contain contact information for the person managing the
domain. While many registrars allow domain security and privacy to hide your
personal information, some don't. Before you add this record, check your DNS
settings with a DNS lookup tool like the C<whois> command-line tool or a
reputable website. If you see your name, address, phone number, and email
address available, then so do other people.

You I<can> of course add this record even if you have contact information
recorded, but be mindful of the fact that any transaction to and from this
address can be associated with the domain contact permanently.

You should also be aware that DNS as originally designed has potential security
flaws, including spoofing. If you're concerned about this potential flaw, make
sure you've configured DNSSEC correctly. Otherwise, someone could pretend to be
you, change this DNS information, and swap their Dogecoin address for yours.

Finally, if you fail to renew your domain or someone snatches it up out from
under you, they can swap their address for yours in their configuration, in the
same way that they could swap their website for yours if you lose control of
your domain name.

=head2 *What Can You Do With This?

Apart from being an interesting forehead-slapper of a trickN<In the sense that,
"Oh yeah, you could totally do this!">, the value of this trick is in the
integrations it enables.

Imagine a web browser extension that could show you a Dogecoin tip address
whenever you visited, if the site owner had one configured. If you like the
site, throw a few Doge their way, right from your browser or mobile device.

Or imagine we repurposed this record to point to a text file or structured data
file on the server, served over HTTPS, that gave access information, purchase
data, or other suggestions, like "If you send 10 Doge to this address, you'll
get 24 hours of access" for a news or other subscription site.

Consider also an alternate approach. C<ifdogethenwow.com> has, as of this
writing, the main domain and a well-knownN<Okay okay, hear me out though!>
subdomain of C<blog.ifdogethenwow.com>. Any and every subdomain could have its
own TXT record with a unique wallet address. An enterprising shibe could start
a site called C<shibetips.whatever> and, for a small fee or out of the goodness
of their hearts, allow users I<optionally> to associate an address with a
subdomain. As always, keep in mind the security and privacy implications, but
think of the possibilities.
