=head1 Calculate Dogecoin's Maximum Market Stats

Z<calculate_dogecoin_maximum_market_stats>

In 2013, your author received his first Dogecoin tip, probably for saying
something insightful or clever on a social media forum. It was worth a fraction
of a penny but it meant something--it gave a warm glow that your author brought
a little bit of value into the world.

In 2021, that tip was worth hundreds of dollars. At the time of this writing,
it's worth tens of dollars. Who knows where it will be in a week, a year, or
ten years?

Some people care a lot about that. If you're using Dogecoin to buy a meal or
donate to pay for medical costs of a young child with illness or to support a
friend on the opposite side of the world, the fluctuations over time aren't
important. If, on the other hand, you see an asset that may appreciate over
time, you owe it to yourself to do the math to figure out what I<could> happen,
if fortunate favored you.

=head2 *Count All the Doge in Existence

How many Dogecoin are in the world? To answer that question, use any reputable
block explorer (or ask a search engine to find one). As of this writing in
April 2023, multiple sources suggest there are about 139 billion Dogecoin in
the world. This number grows by ten thousand with every block minuted, which
happens about once per minute, so, on average, you can expect this number to
grow by 5.26 billion Dogecoin every year.

As of the current writing, there are about 7.96 billion people in the world.

If you do the math, there are, at most, about 17.5 Dogecoin available for every
person in the world. Maybe you have a few more. Most people have fewer. If the
population stayed flat at 7.96 billion, everyone could get 1.5 more Dogecoin in
the next year.

That's not a lot of coins to swap between people if you want to buy cool art or
delicious beverages, or pay for someone to write you a fun computer program or
reward someone for answering a difficult question. Let's think of Dogecoin in a
different way.

=head2 *Count All the Value in Existence

If you had 100 Dogecoin and sold them at the highest possible valuation
Dogecoin has reached (as of this writing), you'd have made about $70 USD. If
you had 1 Bitcoin and sold it at the highest possible valuation it has reached
(as of this writing), you'd have made about $67,500 USD. That's a big
difference between the two currencies.

Part of the difference is that there can only ever be 21 million (that's
million with an m, not billion with a b) Bitcoin. Right now, if all of the
Bitcoin that could ever exist existed, there'd be 6,620 Dogecoin for every 1
Bitcoin. If Dogecoin had the same market capitalization as Bitcoin at its all
time high, that $67,500 per Bitcoin would be equivalent to about $10.20 per
Dogecoin. (The math goes like this: 139 billion Dogecoin divided by 21 million
Bitcoin gives 6,620 Dogecoin per Bitcoin. $67,500 divided by 6,620 gives
$10.20.)

What if there were no Bitcoin though? What if all other cryptocurrencies and
currencies in the world vanished, and there were only Dogecoin?

The World Bank estimates the total Gross World Product--the value in dollars of
all of the economic transactions of all of the countries of the world--at $96.5
trillion (that's trillion with a t) US Dollars at the end of 2021. Let's
subtract a year of Dogecoin from the current number of coins to give 133.74
billion.

If I<every one of those dollars worth of GWP turned into value in Dogecoin>,
each Dogecoin would be worth $721.55 USD.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

If you're investing in Dogecoin, hoping it reaches $10,000 per coin so you can
buy a nice island and shoot rockets at Mars, you're going to have to wait a
while longer.

These calculations are very rough. They don't take into account things like
Dogecoin that were sent to addresses with forgotten keys, or addresses that
don't exist. They don't account for changes in mining strength where there may
be more or fewer blocks mined than we expect every 60 seconds.

What they I<do> accomplish is to set expectations. The entire world economy may
never switch to Dogecoin as a world currency in the lifetime of anyone reading
this book. All 8 or 10 or 20 billion people in the world may never get their
average of 17.5 Dogecoin per person. Your wallet of 100 Dogecoin may never be
worth $6,750,000 and you may not be able to sell it and buy the goat farm
you've always dreamed about nestled between the wheat fields and mountains of
Alberta, Canada.

Dogecoin can still be fun and useful, though. In fact, if anything, realizing
that a billion-dollar moonshot is mathematically and economically impossible
frees up this goofy cryptocurrency to do interesting and quirky and amusing
things. It doesn't have to be the buttoned-up, why-so-serious currency of Very
Serious People who do nothing more than look at charts and talk up their bags.

It's free to be the currency of people who enjoy fun and creativity and doing
useful things.

Have fun. Be creative. Do useful things.
