=head1 Calculate Your Dogecoin Footprint

Z<calculate_your_dogecoin_footprint>

Running a node isn't free, unless someone else paid for your computer and hard
drive and continues to pay for your Internet connection, electricity, and
occasionally brushing the dust off of your computer. Maintaining a node is
sometimes a thankless task, but it keeps the network healthy.

If you hold Dogecoin, you're asking the network to keep track of your coins. A
tiny bit of every node's memory and storage space keeps your money tracked
appropriately. How tiny? How large? It depends on how much you use. You can
figure this out!

=head2 *Count Your Transactions

Your footprint--the amount of cost you generate on the network--shows up in a
couple of ways. First, the total number of transactions you've transacted
affects storage space. Every transaction gets recorded and sticks around for
posterity, after all. Every full node keeps a copy of every transaction in
every block, so the more transactions, the more storage every full node needs.

X<< RPC commands; C<getwalletinfo> >>

How many transactions have affected a wallet? The C<txcount> value of the
C<getwalletinfo> RPC command shows this:

=begin screen

  {
    "walletversion": 130000,
    "balance": ...,
    "unconfirmed_balance": 0.00000000,
    "immature_balance": 0.00000000,
    B<"txcount": 133>,
    "keypoololdest": 1618872149,
    "keypoolsize": 100,
    "paytxfee": 0.00000000,
    "hdmasterkeyid": "..."
  }

=end screen

=head2 *Count Your Unspent Transactions

X<concepts; UTXOs>

The second way your activity affects the blockchain is the amount of data every
node has to track. Every node, even if it's not a full node, needs to know
about every transaction with unspent outputs (UTXOs). This allows nodes to
validate that any attempt to send Dogecoin to an address gets those Dogecoin
from a valid input.

X<< RPC commands; C<listunspent> >>

How many UTXOs are in your wallet? The C<listunspent> RPC command returns
information about every unspent transaction associated with the current wallet.
In the console or from the command line, you'll get a list of transaction data
formatted as a JSON list:

=begin screen

  [
    {
      "txid": "37640d...",
      "vout": 0,
      "address": "DQniBb...",
      "scriptPubKey": "...",
      "amount": 5.00000000,
      "confirmations": 702433,
      "spendable": true,
      "solvable": true
    }
    ...
  ]

=end screen

X<< external utilities; C<jq> >>

If you use C<dogecoin-cli> and pipe the output to C<jq> (as seen in
L<find_all_received_addresses>), you can easily count the number of unspent
transactions associated with this wallet:

=begin command

  $ B<dogecoin-cli listunspent | jq '.[].amount'>
  13

=end command

In this example, the current wallet has a handful of unspent transactions.
Remember, you can use any C<jq> command on this data structure you want. If you
want to extract the I<amount> from every transaction, use the command C<jq
'.[].amount> to get a list of the amount of every transaction.

=head2 *Estimate Your Footprint

How much of the unspent transaction output list represents your unspent
transactions? Use C<gettxoutsetinfo> to find the number of total UTXOs (see
L<track_blockchain_sizes>), then divide:

=begin command

  $ B<dogecoin-cli gettxoutsetinfo | jq '.txouts'>
  17657052

=end command

In this case, divide 13 by 17657052 and multiply by 100 to find out that this
wallet represents 0.000073625% of all UTXOs. Put another way, the next 15
minutes of mining blocks will generate more UTXOs than this wallet has.

What's your footprint for the total number of transactions? As of this writing,
a good estimate for the total number of transactions is 95 million. 133 divided
by 95 million is 0.00014%. Again, this is a wallet with a tiny footprint.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

What's a good footprint? It depends. A wallet with one transaction holding a
billion Dogecoin takes about as much space on a node as a wallet with one
transaction holding one Dogecoin. A wallet that's transacted a million times
but only holds 100 Dogecoin in unspent outputs takes up a lot of space on full
nodes but may only have a couple of UTXOs, while a wallet with 100,000
Dogecoin received in two million tiny transactions will take up a double-digit
percentage of the UTXO set.

If you find yourself in any of these scenarios, should you do anythingN<Besides
sending a significant portion of that billion Dogecoin to buy a copy of this
book for everyone you know.>? It depends! If you realize you're taking up a lot
of storage space, you can consider running a full node. Obviously you're
getting a lot of value from the Dogecoin network, so you can pay it forward.

If you have a large number of unspent transactions, consider spending those
coins. Do something nice for yourself. Tip a friend. Consolidate your funds,
even. In any case, remember that "owning" a bunch of numbers that a network of
computers over the Internet shuttle back and forth buys you bragging rights
until you do something productive with them. Hoarding for the sake of hoarding
costs other people time and resources. Ask yourself what good you could do in
the world, then do it! That's the spirit of Dogecoin.
