=encoding utf-8

=head0 *Foreword

Z<chapter_foreword>

As I write this foreword to chromatic's beautiful book, in the corner of an
empty well-lighted bar in the middle of the night, cannoli waiting for me in a
tray next to my computer, my mind wanders. It goes back to those early days of
December 2013, when I was still living in a small apartment overlooking the
river Tejo in Lisbon. With my partner, I had finally decided to understand more
about Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies. The idea of trying to use my GPU to mine a
cryptocurrency seemed a good point of entry.

Back then, it was already impossible to mine Bitcoin with a GPU. Litecoin was a
possibility. But then we came across the first posts about Dogecoin on Twitter
and Reddit. The "fundamentals" that attracted us to Dogecoin were the yellow
dog in the logo and the Comic Sans font. Yes, it was clear this was a fork of
coins derived from Bitcoin, but the joke of it all was so funny and endearing
that all the rest did not matter. We looked at our dog K., back then still
young and sleeping at our feet, and the decision was taken. I can still hear
the whirring sound of the GPU in that small one-room apartment. It would serve
as a background to my work, sleep, and indoor soccer games with K. for a few
months.

Since 2013, reports of Dogecoin’s death have been greatly exaggerated. The coin
and the community around it that was supposed to die off and disappear proved
to be incredibly resilient. A testament to its decentralized and permissionless
nature, to its community of wacky heroes and occasional villains, but also to
the power of memes and jokes, the power of dogs and the Comic Sans font. "A
laugh that will bury them all," is a phrase that keeps ringing in my head
whenever I see Dogecoin in the wild.

More than 10 years have passed, and while cryptocurrencies have evolved,
education around them is still lacking and is often focusing on the speculative
side of it all. Everything is about the market, instead than on how the tech
works, why it works, and why permissionless decentralized money can matter.

Because Dogecoin is, for the most part, a fork of Bitcoin with the good heart
of a dog. The technical foundations are solid--insofar as Dogecoin is well
maintained and its network is healthy--but the face shown to the public, the
ubiquity of the meme, its irony and friendliness, and the often welcoming
community make it a favorite point of entry for those new to crypto. Dogecoin
holds this special position of being the gateway to crypto for so many, a
special vantage point that should come with a certain sense of responsibility.

This is why a book like this one is so important. chromatic, who also
contributes as a developer and maintainer for Dogecoin Core (Dogecoin’s
reference implementation), guides you through the concepts behind
cryptocurrencies with poise and panache. The brilliant chapters opening the
book introduce important yet potentially unintuitive concepts in a very
approachable and rewarding way. Through the rest of the book, chromatic then
uses dog money as a playground to teach concepts that transcend it.

A writer and free software programmer with a profound love for humanities in
his heart, he might demystify "mnemonic passphrases" by using the words as
solutions to riddles in a treasure hunt, in a chapter filled with Easter eggs
and references to the best adventure game ever. He spends time to teach you how
to run a Dogecoin Node and to monitor and interact with it, but he also needs
to show you how to turn your transaction IDs into music, how to create a
Dogecoin-powered jukebox, how to hide a wallet address in the photo of a lovely
pug, how to tip a Geocache with Dogecoin. Each one of these tricks introduces
or reinforces important concepts by asking you to play with Dogecoin and to
build small things. “Learning by playing” is a way of teaching that seems to
capture Dogecoin’s essence just perfectly.

chromatic writes with lightness and an ebullient sense of fun, but without
eschewing responsibility. He constantly reminds the reader of risks and
possible pitfalls behind many of these tricks. The “Understand the Risks”
section at the end of his tricks are invaluable.

A chapter on how to “Manage a Dogecoin Arcade” completes this book, tying
together everything chromatic has taught you. The chapter introduces design
ideas that might very well power other ventures--such as a cannoli smuggling
device--and like many other chapters of the book tries to bring Dogecoin into
the real world.

Because in the end, I believe that a cryptocurrency has real value only when
people use and transact with it. A cryptocurrency lives when it serves the
purpose of sending money from point A to point B without a centralized
authority behind it, and when it does so safely and reliably. Dogecoin can do
this with the lightness of a joke, the irony of the dog reminding you that
money has worth because people have agreed to transact with it, because they
have decided it stands for something valuable. Dogecoin reminds you that people
should have power over money and not the other way around.

And with his wit, warmth, and intelligence, chromatic manages to introduce
concepts and ideas that will serve his readers well, beyond Dogecoin.

I have indirectly known chromatic for a long time through the legendary Perl
books he wrote, and which I pillaged in my career as a web developer for
desperados and cannoli smugglers running at the edges of this troubled world.

This book has already proven to be just as useful as his earlier books. Have
fun with it.

I<Mishaboar, April 2024>
