=head1 Control Your Jukebox

Z<control_your_jukebox>

Maybe generating your own songs isn't your thing
(L<turn_your_transactions_into_songs>). Maybe you're happier with good songs
performed by great artists.

Suppose you're throwing a barn party for the community, and you have a little
Linux box in the corner loaded up with some bangers, including:

=over 4

=item * "Violent Blue" by Chagall Guevara

=item * "ME<aacute>s Buena" by Alejandra GuzmE<aacute>n and Gloria Trevi

=item * "Starlight" by Muse

=item * "Hurt" by Trent Reznor and Nine Inch Nails, performed by Johnny Cash

=item * "Deceleration (Midpoint)" by The Incomple

=back

... and a bunch of other great tunes. You're streaming video to a bunch of
invitees online, and you're ready for other folks to help you pick the right
order of music.

Your friends from out of town can't exactly put a quarter in the jukebox, but
you don't have a coin slot hooked up to your media box anyway, so why not feed
two birds with one scone and show off your Dogecoin transaction skills and let
people pick songs with Dogecoin?

=head2 *Set Up Your Song List

Other tips show off how to turn incoming transactions into events, but this use
case is a little bit different. Rather than paying for a physical good (a candy
bar) or an immediate single-person service (a single credit on a pinball
machine), a jukebox can entertain or annoy a bunch of people at the same time
(half of the world loves "Sweet Caroline" and half of the world rolls their
eyes at the inevitable singalong) I<and> a jukebox queues up songs.

We can share a lot of the plumbing from other tips, but we'll have to work with
them slightly differently.

Start by picking your playlist. Each song on the list needs a unique number.
We'll start with zero and count up.

Generate an address for each song on the playlist. Store this association
somewhere (see L<associate_addresses_with_machines>). If you're storing this in
a database, you'll end up with something like:

=begin screen

  CREATE TABLE jukebox_song_list (
    dogecoin_address CHARACTER(128) NOT NULL,
    song_name TEXT NOT NULL,
    song_writer TEXT NOT NULL,
    performer TEXT NOT NULL,
    song_list_index INTEGER NOT NULL
  );

=end screen

X<obscure references; The Man in Black>

You can add, remove, or modify this schema as much as you like, but these
fields allow you to model the data set of songs shown earlier. Each song has an
address, a writing credit, and a performing creditN<Trent wrote it, but the Man
in Black owned it!>

Populate this table, and then you can do two things. First, set up your
Dogecoin webhooks (link to this tip) so that all transactions to the associated
addresses invoke some code we're about to walk through. Second, publish the
list of song data and addresses so your friends online can start queueing up
songs in your jukebox!

=begin tip Make a Nice UI

How will people browse songs? You could print out a short text list, or make a
nice web interface, or make a short app--whatever you like. The interesting
plumbing is in the Dogecoin and jukebox pieces. Everything else is up to you to
customize to your liking!

=end tip

With all of that connected, all you need is a webhook receiver to queue up
songs. That's easy to write with a little bit of Python.

=head2 *Build a Jukebox

X<< Python libraries; C<flask> >>
X<< Python libraries; C<python-vlc> >>

What's a jukebox? It's a list of songs and a way to play them in some order.
You can do this in about 50 lines of Python with the right modules installed
(C<flask>, C<python-vlc>).

The Flask portion is a simple web endpoint that takes a JSON payload containing
the index of a song in the playlist and queues it. The VLC portion uses Python
bindings to the VLC media playerN<Currently at U<https://www.videolan.org/vlc>,
but verify before installing!> to queue up a list of songs or other media to
play.

=head3 *A Queue Design

Only one thing makes this complicated: there are two tasks that have to run
simultaneously. The jukebox shouldn't pause the song when someone requests a
new song. Similarly, the jukebox should graciously add new songs to the queue.
If you're an experienced programmer, you probably recognize that this means the
system has to use some kind of parallelization, whether through threads
(spoiler: it'll be threads), asynchronous programming, or inter-process
management.

If you're not an experienced programmer, all you need to understand is that a
program naturally wants to do only one thing at a time, so it's important to
recognize the types of problems where this is not appropriate and design them
carefully so you don't introduce subtle and difficult to debug errors. If
you've ever wondered why rescanning the blockchain (L<watch_an_address>) stops
you from doing other things, that's because changing the chain while you
analyze it could introduce odd inconsistencies.

This jukebox has to have two independent streams of work: playing the songs in
the queue in order and waiting for input from a Dogecoin webhook. These streams have to communicate,
but they need to communicate in only one way. When the webhook activates, that stream of work
needs to put a song on the queue. That's it.

Fortunately, Python's C<Queue> data structure does this in a thread-safe way.

=head3 *Inside the Code

What does the code look like? The first section loads some libraries:

=begin screen

  from flask import Flask, request
  from queue import Queue
  from threading import Thread

  import time
  import vlc

=end screen

You'll have to install C<flask> and C<python-vlc> on your own.

The second section of the code initializes the C<Queue> object and sets up the playlist:

=begin screen

  work_queue = Queue()

  list = [
      'Chagall-Guevara/Violent-Blue',
      'Alejandra-Guzman-Gloria-Trevi/Mas-Buena.ogg',
      'Muse/Starlight.ogg',
      'Johnny-Cash/Hurt.mp3',
      'The-Incomple/Deceleration.ogg',
  ]

=end screen

Hard-coding this list here isn't wonderful; it'd be better to connect to the
database containing the table discussed earlier, but for the sake of this
example, it's easy to understand.

The next section of code defines the two functions that handle playing songs:

=begin screen

  def playSongs(queue):
      while True:
          if not queue.empty():
              songIndex = queue.get()
              playSong(list[songIndex])

          time.sleep(1)

  def playSong(filename):
      p = vlc.MediaPlayer(filename)
      print(f'Playing {filename}')
      p.play()
      time.sleep(1)
      while p.is_playing():
          time.sleep(1)

      p.release()

=end screen

Python will run C<playSongs()> in a separate thread; we'll see this code
shortly. This function loops until the program exits. It checks whether there
are any songs in the queue. If so, it uses C<get()> to pull the index of the
next song off of the queue, then calls C<playSong()> to play the song. This function
checks the queue every second.

You can modify this to play a random song if there's nothing anyone else has
scheduled currently in the queue. Otherwise there will be silence until the
next queued song. For a barn party, you might prefer lots of music. For a nice
quiet ice cream shop, you might prefer a jukebox that only plays songs once in
a while.

X<obscure references; Rose's Cantina>

=begin tip Not Just Marty Robbins

A bar named Rose's Cantina just outside of El Paso, Texas has a jukebox that
plays the Marty Robbins song "El Paso" on repeat. Your author can personally
attest to this. Add more than one song to your jukebox.

=end tip

The code in C<playSong()> is more interesting. Python's VLC bindings give you a
lot of options, but the simplest code your author could make work I<and> wanted
to explain creates a new player, given the location of a media file on disk
(that's the C<filename> parameter). The function then plays the file, sleeps
for a second, and then uses a sleep loop to check if the file is still playing
(that's C<p.is_playing()>). When the file finishes playing, the code releases
the media player object (C<p>) and returns control to C<playSongs()>, which
will use a similar sleep loop to wait until the queue has another song to play.

That first C<time.sleep(1)> is necessary because VLC takes a moment to start.
If you leave out that call, C<p.is_playing()> may return a false value and the
song won't actually play!

The next section of code sets up the webhook destination:

=begin screen

  app = Flask(__name__)

  @app.route('/queueSong', methods = ['POST'])
  def queueSong():
      index = request.json.get('songIndex', 0)
      work_queue.put(int(index))
      return { 'status': f'Queued {index}' }

=end screen

This code creates a Flask app and sets up a route at C<queueSong> where you can
post a JSON body like C<{ 'songIndex': number }>. Given an input, the function
pushes the index onto the queue. C<playSongs()> will pull that index  out of
the queue as soon as the currently-playing song has ended.

Be sure to add error checking to make sure that the user has provided an actual
number and that the index is valid for the size of the song list (integers zero
to 4 are valid for the hard-coded list). 

The final section of code starts everything:

=begin screen

  def main():
      worker = Thread(target=playSongs, args=(work_queue,), daemon=True)
      worker.start()
      app.run(host='0.0.0.0', port='9999')

  if __name__ == '__main__':
      main()

=end screen

This C<main()> function creates and starts a new Python thread where the VLC
song player code can run. Then it launches the Flask app, listening on all
network interfaces on port 9999. Change this to your preferences.

=head2 *What Can You Do With This?

Nothing limits you to MP3 or Ogg Vorbis files. You can play any media files
that VLC supports, and VLC has lots of plugins for lots of files. This code
could play music videos (all you have to do is change what's in C<list> in the
example, or in the database in a more structured example). If you have video
output set up, you can actually see the videos. Or you could add a
visualization to show album art, lyrics, fireworks, or whatever else you like
for music-only media.

Be cautious that a little computer on your network listening on a port can take
data from anyone who can send data on your network. Consider adding
authentication and/or network protection if you want to keep someone from
queueing the same song over and over.
