=head1 Estimate Dogecoin's Current Conversion Value

Z<estimate_current_conversion_value>

X<references; Hood strawberries>

If Dogecoin is money, you should be able to exchange it for other valuable
things, such as goods, services, and other forms of currency. Your consulting
business where you speed up SQL queries (see L<speed_up_analysis>) for 1000
Dogecoin an hour is pretty cool, but when it comes time to visit the local
farmer's market and buy a flat of Hood Strawberries during the three weeks in
June when they're available, you might want USD or at least CAD on hand.

Or you might have in your mind a conversion where one quarter equals one song
played in your Dogecoin jukebox (see L<control_your_jukebox>), but what exactly
does "one quarter" mean on the blockchain?

You can find out and then keep finding out.

=head2 *Conversion Rate APIs

Several exchanges and crypto-related services provide APIs to report the
current exchange rate of any coin in one or more fiat currencies. For example,
you could ask "What would I pay for one Bitcoin in UK Pounds" or "How much
Litecoin can I get for 1 Rupeee".

The intent behind many of these APIs is to charge developers and businesses
building crypto-related products and services for access, so many of these
systems want you to sign up and subscribe to paid services. This can be a good
thing in some ways, but for example purposes, this tip uses C<coinranking.com>
because it has a free API with generous limits for testing.

=begin tip Time Marches On

Depending on how much time has elapsed between the writing of this tip (August
2024) and your reading of this tip (insert local time and date here), this
example may no longer work or the URL may no longer be useful, available, or
accurate. That's okay; ask around, search for alternatives, and be prepared to
switch your code. The concepts still apply even if the details may change.

=end tip

As of this writing, Coinranking has two API endpoints you need to use and
another you might want to use: get list of coinsN<See
U<https://developers.coinranking.com/api/documentation/coins#get-list-of-coins>.>,
get coin priceN<See
U<https://developers.coinranking.com/api/documentation/coins#get-coin-price>.>
and get list of reference currencies listN<See
U<https://developers.coinranking.com/api/documentation/reference_currencies>.>.

X<< external programs; C<curl> >>
X<< external programs; C<jq> >>

The most important call is get coin price. You need a coin's UUID, which you
can retrieve from "get list of coins". Use the tools C<curl> and C<jq> from the
command line:

=begin screen

  $ B<< curl https://api.coinranking.com/v2/coins > coins >>
  $ B<< jq '.data.coins[] | select(.name == "Dogecoin").uuid' < coins >>
  "a91GCGd_u96cF"

=end screen

Note that you could swap C<.uuid> for C<.coins> and get the price in an
all-in-one query, but this two-step process is kinder to the server for
anonymous use.

Given the UUID for Dogecoin (skim the F<coins> file to convince yourself this
is correct), the "get coin price" query is:

=begin screen

  $ B<curl -s https://api.coinranking.com/v2/coin/a91GCGd_u96cF/price | jq .data.price>
  "0.06701734282680077"

=end screen

The C<-s> switch to C<curl> silences extraneous output. Be careful that this
pipeline of commands doesn't handle errors, such as "your network is not
connected", "you need an API key", "the server rate-limited your requests", or
"this API has gone away". Add whatever error-checking you think you might need.

The default currency value is US Dollars. If you need something else, look for
the currency UUID from the reference currencies list:

=begin screen

  $ B<< curl https://api.coinranking.com/v2/reference-currencies > currencies >>
  $ B<< jq '.data.currencies[] | select(.name == "Turkish Lira").uuid' < currencies >>
  "Dk5T6J0UtCUA"

=end screen

... then provide the currency UUID to the price callN<The linebreaking in this
example is for display purposes; you can run this command as a single line.>:

=begin screen

  $ B<export API=https://api.coinranking.com/v2/coin>
  $ B<curl -s "$API/a91GCGd_u96cF/price?referenceCurrencyUuid=Dk5T6J0UtCUA \>
    B<| jq .data.price>
  "1.70040047930945557576"

=end screen

That's 1.7 lira (Turkish or Cyprian), give or take, per Dogecoin.

With this query example in place, you can automate this system to:

=over 4

=item * Run this job hourly, or on whatever schedule works for you

=item * Update a value in a database with the current price

=item * Send you a notification when prices rise or fall outside of specific
thresholds

=back

Again, use this only if the I<current> conversion rate between your local
currency and Dogecoin is meaningful for specific transaction purposes such as
pricing inputs and outputs appropriately. Otherwise you run the risk of
worrying too much about something that's supposed to be fun.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Whenever you rely on external data you don't control yourself, you face at
least two risks. First, the data could be inaccurate for any reason: it's been
hijacked, it's under the control of malicious actors, it's out of date, it's
calculated incorrectly, et cetera. Depending on your needs, you might want to
verify these values against multiple independent sources. In a case like this,
the numbers probably won't match exactly, but you might expect them to converge
over time on median values no more than one sigma apart.

If that doesn't happen, ring the alarm bell!

The second risk of relying on an external data source is that data source's
longevity. What happens if the API goes away? If your work depends on fresh and
accurate data, then establishing a business relationship with an entity with a
contract and obligations can reduce your risk.

Another, more oblique risk is your personal appetite to watch the value of your
holdings fluctuate on a regular basis. If you've invested hours and dollars
into building up your system and a one-penny move downward is depressing and
disheartening and a one-penny move upward is euphoric, think about what you
want to accomplish in the long term and try to find a way to measure your
success over time.

If you need to cash out every day to mitigate your risk, that's fine. If you're
holding coins because you don't need them to pay your bills right now, spend
your time making sure your other finances support your choices.

X<obscure references; Charlie Papazian>

In the end, we're all just swapping friendly dog-themed ideas based around
large numbers a bunch of computers are swapping. To paraphrase Charlie
Papazian: "Relax. Don't worry. Have a Dogecoin."
