=head1 Generate a QR Code

Z<generate_a_qr_code>

If you're taking payments in Dogecoin in some kind of in-person setting, you
probably want an easy way to allow people to send you payments without talking
through an entire wallet address out loudN<"That's D as in Doge, K as in
Kabosu, no I don't want to say Donkey Kong, just trust me.">.

This is even more important when you want to remove some degree of human
intervention from the process. Suppose you have a pinball arcade and you want
to allow people to pay with quarters I<or> with Dogecoin. What can you do to
accept payments with as little friction as possible?

=begin tip Payments, Part One

There are other logistical problems to overcome with the arcade example, but
those are the subjects of other tips. Keep reading!

=end tip

A Bitcoin Improvement Proposal has the answer.

=head2 *Dogecoin-Aware Wallet Links

As defined in BIP-21N<See
U<https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0021.mediawiki>.>, a
hyperlink starting with C<bitcoin:> and followed by an address tells your
computer, phone, tablet, or other device to open some sort of wallet
application and prepare to send a transaction to the given address.

Dogecoin adopted this obviously good idea.

If you are, for example, selling electronic copies of a book about Dogecoin
online, you might create BIP-21 address like
C<dogecoin:DAY5wNkebzEyqUXCkN9koKNBuzXRKRTjcL> to receive funds. Then if
someone clicks on that link on a device that understands that format, their
wallet will pop up and allow them to decide whether to complete the
transaction.

That works pretty well on a web page, but if you're in this amazing Doge-aware
pinball arcade, do you really want to pull up a webpage and search for the
right link when you turn the corner and see the incredibly rare Baby Pac-Man!
machine you weren't sure if you imagined in a dream?

Wouldn't it be more fun to pull out your phone, snap a pic, and then start
playing?

=head2 *Dogecoin-Aware Images

You're probably already familiar with QR codes, the three-dimensional barcode
looking images that contain arbitrary data and take you to real estate listings
or menus in restaurants that don't want to hand out grubby menus. Why not make
your own?

Okay, you've probably also already seen that the Dogecoin Core creates both a
BIP-21 address and a QR code when you ask it to produce a receiving address.
That's not always 100% convenient (What if you're using an offline wallet? What
if you don't have the Core available? What if you don't have the Core GUI
running?)

It's easy enough to make your own QR code with your own address.

While there are multiple websites that purport to generate QR codes given a
link, you shouldn't have to trust a third-party to do it right. Yes, you can
and should always double-check with your own phone or device that the code
contains the link you want, but it's important to know how to work these tools
on your own as well.

You can generate QR codes from lots of programming languages and tools. One
good tool is the Python module C<qrcode>N<See
U<https://pypi.org/project/qrcode/> for more details.>. This module includes a
command-line utility called C<qr> that makes generating images easy:

=begin screen

  $ B<qr 'dogecoin:DAY5wNkebzEyqUXCkN9koKNBuzXRKRTjcL'` \>
    B<< > book-address-qr.png >>

=end screen

This will write a PNG file as output containing the QR code encoding the
address. If your terminal supports image output, you can test the command by
skipping the file redirection and pointing your phone at the screen, as shown
in in L<figure-dogecoin-qr-code-generation>.

=begin figure Generate a QR Code from the Command Line

Z<figure-dogecoin-qr-code-generation>

F<images/dogecoin-qr-code-generation>

=end figure

Easy enough?

=begin tip Install Python and qrcode Simply

IF you already have Python 3 installed, use C<python3 -m pip install qrcode>.
If you don't have Python 3 installed, I've created an installer at
U<https://platform.activestate.com/chromatic/Python-QR-Codes> for Linux, Mac,
and Windows systems.

=end tip

=head2 *What Can You Do With This?

You can take payments from a variety of devices with reduced human interaction.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

We've already discussed the risk of using someone else's QR code generator to
generate your QR codes. Always check and double-check that the embedded link is
a BIP-21 link that contains your address.

If you do print out these QR codes and put them on your pinball machines, be
sure to do so in a way that doesn't hurt the paint. Attach them to glass or
metal surfaces. You'll thank yourself later.

Printing out QR codes does run the risk of re-using addresses. While it's much,
much safer to generate new addresses for each transaction, you may find this
risk is worthwhile to reduce the need for human interaction for every pinball
play. If you do go this route, rotate your addresses and generate new QR codes
frequently (weekly? monthly?).

Finally, be aware that a payment system that relies on people scanning codes
with their phones is susceptible to the risk that someone may print out their
own QR codes and stick them over the top of your own codes, sort of like an ATM
skimmer. Watch your pinball machines carefully.
