=head1 Identify a Scam

Z<identify_a_scam>

Some of the most useful features of a cryptocurrency such as Dogecoin,
including the opportunity for anonymity, lack of a single centralized
authority, an immutable transaction ledger, and programmable money have their
risks. This should not surprise you; the same is true of cash, credit cards,
and other payment instruments.

Yet for all of the promise that a decentralized cryptocurrency means that you
don't need anyone's permission to make a transaction, there's also no person to
appeal to if something goes wrong. There's only math and network consensus, and
they only care about accuracy, not ethics. If you have a working motto, it
should be "don't trust; verify".

In short: it's your responsibility to make sure that you avoid scams and avoid
scamming people (see L<pledge_to_do_only_good>). Here are some ways to help you
do that.

=head2 *What Makes a Scam?

Every scam shares one common element: someone is asking you to give up control
of your funds. They'll promise one thing or another, but every time someone
wants to get their hands on your money, currency, coins, whatever--they'll
eventually need you to hand it over. This can take many forms, all of them
promising you something in the future in exchange for something now!

=head3 *Buy Low, Sell High

A "fear of missing out" scam, or FOMO, puts pressure on you to buy something
now because the price will rise in the future and you won't get the opportunity
for great returns. You'll kick yourself in the future, when everyone else is
driving a Lamborghini and sipping muddled blueberry lemonade by their
dollar-sign shaped infinity pools. "Have fun being poor", people say, as they
put more pressure on you to think about the regret you will eventually have for
I<not> giving them your money.

It's natural to think about all of the amazing
things you can do if everything goes right. It's easy to get caught up in the
excitement. That's why lottery tickets sell, of course--even though your odds
of winning are always very, very low, the idea of winning big is so exciting
that a couple of dollars seems like a small price to pay. As well, people I<do>
win: just not very many.

B<How do you resist this?> Demand answers to questions such as "why will the
price go up" and "what is the evidence that the price will go up" and "who
benefits if the price goes up". If the answers all hand-wave away your
concerns, continue to be skeptical. "Demand will increase" is not an answer,
unless there's some reason I<why> demand will increase, and "people will see
the price continue to go up" is I<not> a reason why demand will increase--it's
evidence that the scam will continue.

=head3 *Give Me Your Money, I'll Give You More Money

Another scam locks up your money under someone else's control with the promise
of incredibly high returns. "You'll earn 60% returns in a year!" they'll say,
which sounds amazing, but should set off every scam detector in a twelve-block
radius. If you can earn 60% returns in a year, why would you need to ask anyone
else for money? Why would you need to control someone else's money to earn
those returns? (Even a credit card at a terrible rate will only charge you 30%
APY or so, so your effective return before taxes will still be extraordinary.)

You can often see this scam in terms of "staking" coins, where you promise not
to sell and give up custody in exchange for payment down the line. What they
aren't telling you is that they're going to sell or lend your coins, and
they're going to pay you with the proceeds they get from other people.

B<How do you resist this?> Demand answers to questions such as "where do the
profits come from". If you stake 100 Dogecoin on January 1 and someone promises
to pay you back plus 60 Dogecoin on December 31, they ought to be able to
explain exactly where those 60 Dogecoin come from (as well as any other profits
they make on the transaction, because you know they're not giving you all the
profits).

=head3 *Clone, Pump, and Dump

Yet another scam trades on the history, goodwill, and name recognition of one
thing while promoting an alternative that isn't the same thing at all. In fact,
the alternative isn't the same thing so much, that it's entirely under the
control of someone or someones who stand to profit from the confusion.

Imagine, for example, that Pupper Soda were a new soft drink brand, and it had a
passionate, growing following of people who appreciated its bold, fresh taste,
low-calorie presence, and need for very little sugar. More and more
restaurants, taco stands, and vending machines offered Pupper Soda, and its
creators were reaping the financial rewards.

Someone approaches you on the street as you're enjoying a refreshing beverage
and said "I bet you wish you'd invested in Pupper Soda." You nod, wary. "Well,
they're coming out with a new product, Good Pupper Soda, and it's going to be
even bigger." Your eyes narrow, and you avoid the temptation to put your hand
on your wallet to keep it close to you. "You should buy into Good Pupper Soda
while you can, because it's going to be huge."

You close your eyes, because you know he's about to wave a contract in front of
your face and demand you hand over whatever's in your wallet, without
acknowledging that he made a copy of the Pupper Soda vending machine, changed the
name, and is filling up the cans with tap water from the hose on his
garageN<Admittedly, this analogy is getting away from the author.>.

You're going to get a Fear of Missing Out pitch shortly, and you're going to
hear "Have fun being poor" and you're going to get a lot of hand-waving
explanations about why Pupper Soda is going to be huge. Your conversational
assailant is in the Pump phase of Pump and Dump, and you're the target.

B<How do you resist this?> Demand answers to questions such as "why do you need
additional investors" and "who owns what you're selling" and "why this specific
knockoff, instead of any of a thousand others". If you're interested in getting
deep into technical details, ask "What implementation makes this different from
the original", because it's easy to shave the serial numbers off of someone
else's work and slap a fresh coat of paint on it and pass it off as something
original. Finally, ask "Who controls it" and I<verify> the answers.

In the cryptocurrency world, if someone has made a new coin (or, even easier, a
new token) and spent more time making a logo and website than making a
technology that differentiates at the protocol or consensus level, you're
probably looking at the kind of scam where they'll sell you their supply and
then disappear.

=head3 *Not Your Wallet, Not Your Coins

Another scam or scam-adjacent risk is when someone requires you to hand over
control to your wallet, your keys, and/or your coins. This could be anything
from holding funds in a tipbot on Discord or another social media platform,
holding funds in an exchange, or letting someone else see your private keys for
any purpose other than backupsN<If you've distributed fragments of your private
keys to your brother, your attorney, and your childhood friend in case anything
happens to you--and you do the same for them--that's a different story, though
one with its own risks.>.

Anyone who holds your keys can do whatever they want and the network, the
protocol, and the network consensus protocol cannot distinguish between what
you intended and what the math allows. The network will not protect you; the
network does not distinguish between what you consider a "right" or "wrong" use
of your keys. Either the transaction validates or it doesn't.

B<How do you resist this?> Give no one your keys and give no one control of
your wallet. If you can't avoid this, reduce access temporarily by transferring
your coins to a wallet completely under your control, practicing safe key
management discipline, and distrusting anyone who tells you that you must trust
them.

=head2 *What Can You Do With This?

This isn't an exhaustive list of all possible scams. There are many more, with
new ones developed all the time. It's worth repeating: all scams depend on you
giving up control somewhere, somehow to someone else.

You work hard for what you have (see L<make_money_with_dogecoin>), and it's
important to protect your interests. Check and double-check what you intend to
do, and remember: you can only trust the people and things you can verify.
Anyone operating with clear intentions should make it easy for you to verify
what they say. Anyone who hides their intentions between "trust me" or "what
are you afraid of, success" is waving a red flag.
