=head1 Install Programmable Buttons

Z<install_programmable_buttons>

This is it: the moment of truth. Think back to everything that's built up to
this so far. You've learned the basics of cryptography and the ins and outs of
running a Dogecoin node. You've explored sending commands to and receiving data
from the network.

You've sent and received transactions. You've generated and used and secured
addresses. You've thought about payment systems and wallet security. You've
played games and explored puzzles.

Along the way you've read about making actual machines do actual work (see
L<program_real_buttons> and L<flip_a_switch>) and you've done things when your
node saw things happen on the network (see L<take_actions_on_new_blocks>).

Now it's time to put what you've learned together and wire up a real actual
pinball machine to the Dogecoin network.

=head2 *What You Need

It's okay if you don't have a big, heavy, expensive pinball machine lying
around. Anything that can be controlled with a simple electric switch will do:
coffee machine, music player, lava lamp, flashing sign, or anything else.

This tip assumes you have:

=over 4

=item * programmed a relay board to control a switch from a network command

=item * basic electronic parts, such as wires, Molex connectors, alligator
clips, and a multimeter

=item * access to basic knowledge about electricity and circuits, yourself or a
friend

=item * a Core node or other Dogecoin wallet connected to the network

=back

=head2 *Connecting the Board to the Machine

For this example, your author used a Lord of the Rings Stern Pinball
machineN<See U<https://sternpinball.com/game/the-lord-of-the-rings/> and
U<https://pinside.com/pinball/machine/lord-of-the-rings>.>. This machine has
two coin slots and, importantly, an expansion connector to add a tournament
printer.

On your machine, you may have a different configuration, such as a button to
simulate adding a coin, a bill acceptor for paper money, or a card reader.
Similarly, you may have a power connector intended to supply another accessory
or no power at all.

B<This is important>: you need to connect to the machine in at least one,
perhaps two ways. First, to toggle the switch which signals to the machine that
someone has inserted a credit (simulating a coin, card swipe, or bill
insertion). Second, to power the programmable relay board.

You don't I<need> to do the second, though it may be more convenient, but you
do need to power the board somehow. The nice part about powering the board from
inside the machine is that the board is neither visible nor externally
accessible; you can lock the coin door to keep people out.

=head3 *Getting Power

On the inside right of the LoTR machine, you can find a three-pin Molex
connector. This provides a ground wire, a +5V wire, and another wire you can
ignore. If your board runs from 5 volts, you can attach two wires to a Molex
connector to power the board.

=begin tip If You Know You Know

Be careful doing this. If you connect the wrong wires, you can damage either or
both the board and the pinball machine. Check and double-check the voltage and
your connections.

This tip will explain the concepts and show diagrams, but it won't tell you
I<exactly> how to do things, because you're much safer working with someone who
has practical experience doing things like this.

=end tip

If all goes well, you can power down the machine, unplug the machine, connect
the board connector to the machine connector, plugin in the machine, turn on
the machine, and see your board light up (then see it on the network).

With power to the board, try sending a signal to the board to toggle the relay.
With your multimeter connected to the correct relay terminals, you should see a
voltage toggle to the tune of 5 volts. If you don't, check your connections and
debug your settingsN<Your author managed to reprogram his board trying to get
the power connection right, so be prepared to reprogram anything you need
there.>.

=head3 *Connecting to the Switch

In the LoTR machine, the right coin slot is easy to access. It has one blade
connector and one soldered connector. When someone inserts a coin, a mechanical
lever closes the circuit between the two connectors briefly, and the machine
registers a credit.

To simulate this, connect one wire from the relay board to the blade connector
and another to the soldered connector. For the specific ESP board, use the wire
from the Normally Open (NO) relay terminal to the blade connector and the wire
from the Normally Closed (NC) terminal to the soldered connector. If you're
testing this now, you can use an alligator clip for the soldered connector
instead, if you're I<very> careful not to short anything else. Otherwise, a
Scotchlok connector might be better.

Similarly, for the blade connector, consider using a pigtail where you can
insert the wire from the relay board I<between> the existing connections.

Testing this way allows you to get the figurative bugs out of the system before
making permanent modifications to your machine.

=head3 *Customizing Your System

=begin figure LoTR Programmable Relay Schematic

Z<figure-lotr_programmable_relay_schematic>

F<images/doge-arcade-schematic.png>

=end figure

You can take this a lot further, perhaps sharing one relay between multiple
machines (in that case, you have to run wires from a central board to all
machines, but you only need to power the board once). You can also disable the
coin slot or payment mechanism if you like--or even remove it, if you prefer.

See L<figure-lotr_programmable_relay_schematic> for a schematic of the relay
connection specific to this Stern machine. You can adapt this to your machine
by examining its service manual very carefully. In particular, in this
schematic, note the 1N4004 diode connected to the relay which matches a similar
diode on the machine's coin mechanism.

You may need to add something similar for safety (and to match scan timings of
the machine).

With the board connected to the machine for power and the relay connected to
the coin slot, now you can send a command to toggle the switch. If all goes
well, you'll see the machine register a credit.

If not, check that the relay toggling is the one you intend to toggle, that the
connections are secure and not shorted, and that the delay on the toggle is
long enough.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Whew. All it took to get a quarter's worth of pinball is an entire book full of
programmable dog money, but you made it.

The main risk of doing something cool like this is that you'll spend a lot of
time and money collecting obscure hardware and then say "Wouldn't it be amazing
if I installed a webcam and put a QR code online so people could pay one
Dogecoin to see their pinball credits register?" All of the pieces here and in
this chapter and in this book can be rearranged and recombined in many ways,
some of them not invented yet. Maybe you'll be the one to invent them.

In more seriousness, the risks of doing any electrical work inside a large
device like a pinball machine are electrocution, fire, and damage to either
device. Again, review the service manual, consult a knowledgeable friend, and
test and re-test with your multimeter. This goes whether you're connecting
arcade hardware, multimedia equipment, or anything else.

On the other hand, the rewards are pretty cool, and there's no satisfaction
quite like taking what you've learned and making something tactile with
it--especially when you start with what was supposed to be a joke and now has
become something useful.
