=head1 Make Money with Dogecoin

Z<make_money_with_dogecoin>

People do the things they do for many reasons. Sometimes you want to impress
other people. Sometimes you want to feed yourself and your family and a bunch
of animals. Sometimes you want to learn something new, or spent a couple of
hours doing something different. Sometimes you see a problem your brain won't
let you leave unsolved.

Even as much as the Doge community's motto of Do Only Good Everyday is a lovely
ideal, other wants and needs motivate people's words and deeds. Furthermore,
half of the word "cryptocurrency" is "currency". That means money.

Ignoring money ignores important motivations that move people. It's time to
talk about money: specifically, how to make money with Dogecoin.

=head2 *Sell Something Cool

This book tries to reinforce the theme that I<you need no permission to do
something cool> or fun or amazing or useful. You don't need to run a Core node
or any software at all to receive Dogecoin as payment. All you need is an
address to which you can receive transactions. You can calculate that by hand
or export it from a node or use any other mechanism you prefer--as long as you
keep your private keys safe and secure.

Suppose you keep bees and sell honey every spring and summer weekend at the
local Farmer's Market. Why not print a QR code on your stand (see
L<generate_a_qr_code>) and experiment with taking payments in a different
currency? You will face some challenges, such as getting the price right based
on the current exchange rate, waiting for the payment to settle, and explaining
why a cartoon dog wears a bee costume (see L<customize_your_qr_code>). Maybe
it's worth it to overcome those questions.

Maybe you charge admission for something, like a pinball arcade (see
L<watch_wallet_addresses>), where proof of entry is proof that a
customer-specific address customer has received a payment. This avoids some
questions (When has my transaction settled? It's a pre-event purchase! Buy your
ticket at least a couple of minutes in advance!) and raises others (What if the
cost of admission fluctuated dramatically between purchase and event?).

To make a million Dogecoin by:

=over 4

=item * selling games of pinball at 10 Dogecoin each, sell one hundred thousand
plays

=item * selling jars of honey at 100 Dogecoin each, sell ten thousand jars

=item * selling concert admission at 250 Dogecoin each, sell four thousand tickets

=back

Is a million your goal? Maybe. Maybe not. Do the math for your own situation.

=head2 *Become an Expert

Perhaps you're less an apiarist than you are a music tutor, editor, or sketch
artist. Perhaps you have certain programming skills from years of deciphering
open source code. Your time and experience have value, and you deserve
compensation for that value at a fair and equitable rate.

Taking payments from outside of the country can be tricky. Taking payments from
individuals can be slowly and risky. A quick, permissionless, decentralized
system for sending payments over the Internet can remove friction from this
processN<Please follow your local regulations about reporting income, paying
taxes, and accounting properly. Do good not only for yourself but for your
neighbors too.>.

Maybe you've set up a face-painting or caricature stand at a school carnival,
or your kids have a "muddle your own blueberry lemonade" stand on the street
corner on a hot weekend day, or there's a line under the sign you jokingly hung
over your back porch reading "5 Minutes of Advice, Line Starts Here" and you
realize your time is worth something.

To make a million Dogecoin by:

=over 4

=item * selling the experience of making blueberry lemonade at 25 Dogecoin
each, help people mix forty thousand glasses

=item * selling open source consulting at 1000 Dogecoin per hour, consult for
one thousand hours

=item * painting Cheems on cheeks for 40 Dogecoin each, send forty thousand
happy dogs into the world

=item * mowing lawns for 35 Dogecoin each, mow twenty eight thousand small
lawns

=back

=head2 *Invest in Usage, not Value

Many of these examples and countless others are within your reach right now.
If you brainstormed for an entire weekend, you could probably find at least
three or four Dogecoin-generating ideas with what you already know and have
available.

If your goal is to turn your efforts into cash in the bank, you need to know
two things. First, what's the currency value of your current unspent
transactions. Second, what's going to happen in the future?

The latter question is easier to answer: no one knows. If the maximum potential
exchange rate for Dogecoin is about $720 (see
L<calculate_dogecoin_maximum_market_stats>), you need to hold 1400 Dogecoin to
have the value of a million dollars. For I<that> to happen, a single Doge has
to be worth 5000 times what it's worth right now, as of this writing.

Is that likely to happen? Don't take anyone's word for it. Anyone who promises
any investment advice (other than "here's one way to calculate possibilities,
review the math for yourself") is doing something suspicious. Buying anything
and hoping the value goes up and you can sell it later for a profit always
involves risk.

Instead, focus on value. What can I<you> do with the knowledge you have and can
gain? What special things can you provide the world? Maybe it's artisanal
honey, career counseling, dog-walking, a pop-up makeover stand in a subway,
busking with a hammered dulcimer and harmonica, or something else.

Think of it this way--if you had a million Dogecoin and no one wanted to do
anything with Dogecoin like pay their rent, buy a delicious pastry, pre-order a
book, help a child have heart surgery, or I<do> anything by I<spending>
Dogecoin, what's the value of your holding?

A network of people, computers, calculations, or anything is only as good as
the uses it enables. Everyone who uses Dogecoin to accomplish something useful,
helpful, entertaining, or just plain I<good> makes the value of the network go
up. Maybe your favorite pizza bakery doesn't take cryptocurrency now, but maybe
they'll see the value in a couple of years as people reading these words keep
building!

The more people you encourage to I<make transactions>, the more value moves
through the network and the more demand there is for the network's value. The
price may go up or down or stay the same, but every new adopter means that
there's more that you can do with your million Dogecoin--and there are more
ways you can receive Dogecoin. Holding for the sake of holding may help you,
but if everyone does that, it helps no one. Help yourself and help other people
instead. More people spending means more people running nodes, mining blocks,
and buying and selling. That makes a stronger network and a stronger Dogecoin.

In the end, worry less about what's going to happen in a possible (but
mathematically implausible) universe. Spend your energy to build good things,
support other people building good things, and enjoy the ride.

In other words, keep doing only good everyday (L<pledge_to_do_only_good>).
