=head1 Make Millions with Dogecoin

Z<make_millions_with_dogecoin>

People do the things they do for many reasons. Sometimes you want to impress
other people. Sometimes you want to feed yourself and your family and a bunch
of animals. Sometimes you want to learn something new, or spent a couple of
hours doing something different. Sometimes you see a problem and your brain
won't let you leave it unsolved.

Even as much as the Doge community's motto of Do Only Good Everyday is an ideal
we can all work toward realizing, it's important to acknowledge that other
ideals and needs motivate people's words and deeds. Furthermore, half of the
word "cryptocurrency" is "currency". That means money. Ignoring money ignores
the very real motivations that move people.

It's time to talk about money: specifically, how to make millions with
Dogecoin.

=head2 *Sell Something Cool

One of the themes of this book is that I<you need no permission to do something
cool> or fun or amazing or useful. You don't need to run a Core node or any
sort of software to receive Dogecoin as payment. All you need is an address to
which you can receive transactions. You can calculate that by hand or export it
from a node or use any other mechanism you prefer.

You do want to make sure your private keys are safe and secure, of course.

Suppose you keep bees and sell honey every spring and summer weekend at the
local Farmer's Market. Why not print a QR code on your stand
(L<generate_a_qr_code>) and experiment with taking payments in a different
currency? You will face some challenges, such as getting the price right based
on the current exchange rate, waiting for the payment to settle, and explaining
why a cartoon dog is wearing a bee costume (L<customize_your_qr_code>). Maybe
it's worth it to overcome those questions.

Maybe you charge admission for something, like a pinball arcade
(L<watch_wallet_addresses>), where proof of entry is proof that a specific
address generated solely for each customer has received a payment. This avoids
some questions (When has my transaction settled? It's a pre-event purchase! Buy
your ticket at least a couple of minutes in advance!) and raises others (What
if the cost of admission fluctuated dramatically between purchase and event?).

To make a million Dogecoin selling things:

=over 4

=item * selling games of pinball at 10 Dogecoin each, sell one hundred thousand
plays

=item * selling jars of honey at 100 Dogecoin each, sell ten thousand jars

=item * selling concert admission at 250 Dogecoin each, sell four thousand tickets

=back

=head2 *Become an Expert

Perhaps you're less an apiarist than you are a music tutor, editor, or sketch
artist. Perhaps you have certain programming skills developed over years of
staring at open source code, trying to figure out what's going on. Your time
and experience have value, and you should be compensated for that value at a
rate you consider fair and equitable.

Taking payments from outside of the country can be tricky. Taking payments from
individuals can be slowly and risky. A quick, permissionless, decentralized
system for sending payments over the Internet can remove a lot of friction from
this processN<Do note your local regulations about reporting income, paying
taxes, and accounting properly. Do good not only for yourself but for your
neighbors too.>.

Maybe you've set up a face-painting or caricature stand at a school carnival,
or your kids have a "muddle your own blueberry lemonade" stand on the street
corner on a hot weekend day, or there's a line under the sign you jokingly hung
over your back porch reading "5 Minutes of Advice, Line Starts Here" and you
realize your time is worth something.

To make a million Dogecoin providing value:

=over 4

=item * selling the experience of making blueberry lemonade at 25 Dogecoin
each, help people mix forty thousand glasses

=item * selling open source consulting at 1000 Dogecoin per hour, consult for
one thousand hours

=item * painting Cheems on cheeks for 40 Dogecoin each, send forty thousand
happy dogs into the world

=item * mowing lawns for 35 Dogecoin each, mow twenty eight thousand small
lawns

=back

=head2 *A Word on Investing

Some of these examples--and countless others--are within your reach right now.
If you sat and brainstormed for an entire weekend, you could probably find at
least three or four ideas that could let you start sending and receiving
Dogecoin with what you already know and have available.

If your goal is to turn your efforts into dollarsN<Or whatever local currency
you prefer!> in the bank, you need to know two things. First, what's the dollar
value of your current unspent transactions. Second, what's going to happen in
the future?

The latter question is easier to answer: no one knows. If the maximum potential
exchange rate for Dogecoin is about $720
(L<calculate_dogecoin_maximum_market_stats>), you need to hold 1400 Dogecoin to
have the value of a million dollars. For I<that> to happen, a single Doge has
to be worth 9000 times what it's worth right now, as of this writing.

Is that likely to happen? Don't take anyone's word for it. Anyone who promises
any investment advice (other than "here's one way to calculate possibilities,
review the math for yourself") is doing something suspicious. Buying anything
and hoping the value goes up and you can sell it later for a profit always
involves risk.

Instead, focus on value. What can I<you> do with the knowledge you've gained
from this book? What special things can you provide the world? Maybe it's
artisanal honey, career counseling over video chat, dog-walking, a pop-up
makeover stand in a subway, busking with a hammered dulcimer and harmonica, or
something else.

A network of people, computers, calculations, or anything is only as good as
the uses it enables. Everyone who uses Dogecoin to accomplish something useful,
helpful, entertaining, or just plain I<good> makes the value of the network go
up. Maybe your favorite pizza bakery doesn't take cryptocurrency now, but maybe
they'll see the value in a couple of years as people reading these words keep
inventing new uses.

In the end, it's less useful to worry about what's going to happen in a
possible (but mathematically implausible) universe than it is to build good
things, support other people building good things, and enjoy the ride.

In other words, keep doing only good everyday.

