=head1 Pledge to Do Only Good

Z<pledge_to_do_only_good>

People do the things they do for many reasons. From outside their own minds, we
can only judge those reasons by a person's actions (and, sometimes, the words
they use to describe those actions).

Some philosophers think about ethics and morality in terms of harm and benefit.
Did your choices and actions help people? Did they hurt people? Other
philosophers define this in terms of larger benefit.  Did your choices and
actions help or hurt society at large? Still other philosophers define ethics
in terms of the far future of humanity. What can you do now to help the
greatest number of people, living or potentially living in the future?

This is a book about funny and friendly dog-themed cryptocurrency, so some of
these highfalutin' concepts may seem out of place. On the other hand, this is a book
about cryptocurrency, so it's important to talk about avoiding scams and traps and
I<not> doing harm to others.

Many of the other tips in this book include information about how to protect
yourself and your interests. Remember also that Dogecoin is a community. It's a
network.  It's a decentralized network based on trust, cooperation, and
mutually beneficial competing interests. You don't have to trust any one person
or node or group, and they don't have to trust you. You just have to verify
that what someone asserts to be true is actually true.

We can go further, however.

=head2 *What is Good (Ethically)

How do you know what is good actually? That's a deep question. Perhaps it's
easier to ask about how you can tell if something is good.

B<Does it help people?> Is writing a book about cryptocurrency in the putative
crypto-winter bear market of 2022-2023 good? Will it teach people things? Is it
accurate? Is it entertaining? Is it worth the money, even if the only thing
people learn is that goats are ill-mannered creatures (L<vote_on_goats>)?

B<Is it honest?> Are you including the pros and cons and benefits and drawbacks
as you explain something to other people? If you're simplifying for the purpose
of explanation, did you tell them that? Do they understand there are other
important details and do they know where to learn more?

B<Is it verifiable?> Can you prove the truth of your claim? Can other people?
Can other people prove this easily?

B<Is it sustainable?> Does this thing you're doing work only once? Can other
people do it? Can they do it by themselves, or at least without you?

B<Do the people benefiting pay the costs?> If you do something that requires
other people to pick up the tab, who are they? What benefit do they get? Do
they give informed consent? Do they give informed consent I<to your specific
use case>?

These are all abstract guidelines, but it's impossible to create an ethical
code of conduct that covers every possible situation you find yourself in. If
and when you have trouble answering one of these questions unambiguously yes,
ask yourself "What would need to be true for me to answer this question
unambiguously yes?"

=head2 *What is Useful (Practically)

X<references; hate parsley>

Ethical and useful aren't always the same things. It may be ethical to start an
online donation site where each donated Dogecoin means you'll plant cilantro in
your backyard to combat climate change and increase carbon capture, but it'd
take a lot of cilantro to make any difference at all, and cilantro--or I<hate
parsley>--is disgusting.

What interesting characteristics of I<useful> might apply?

B<Create more value than you capture>. Writing a book is funN<For some
people.>. Writing a book and having other people I<read> it and learn things
and do cool things is, hopefully, an example of a value-producing activity.

B<Share knowledge and capabilities>. This is one of the most valuable
characteristics of free and open source software. A seasoned software developer
might find a very interesting new feature or effective optimization and keep it
to themselves, but submitting a pull request to one of the numerous Dogecoin
projects out there puts this new capability in the hands of other people who
can benefit from it.

B<Make it easy for other people to do the right thing>. Again, I<right> is
fraught with trouble defining concretely, but ask yourself if you were trying
to do something and you weren't an expert, how likely would you be to get the
outcome you want without running down blind alleys or accidentally making
costly mistakes?

=head2 *Good In Practice

What would this all look like in a specific context? Let's talk about the
responsibility of a core maintainer of important Dogecoin software, such as the
Dogecoin Core.

At the minimum, can we agree that core maintainers should:

=over 4

=item * Review all code changes carefully for correctness, security, and
maintainability

=item * Review all bug reports, feature requests, and issues to understand
proposed problems, actual problems, and workable solutions

=item * Disclose any potential or perceived conflicts of interest to other
maintainers as they might be material

=item * Strenuously avoid discussions of price, investing, and speculation that
could be seen as attempts to manipulate the market

=back

The last is tricky. It's hopefully ethical to discuss potential market cap
(L<calculate_dogecoin_maximum_market_stats>) and to acknowledge that Dogecoin
can be used to make money (L<make_millions_with_dogecoin>), provided that one
discloses any biases and keeps the discussion focused on verifiable facts and
figures.

It's hopefully also obvious that it would be unethical to know of potentially
exploitable security flaws or network limitations and not disclose them to
other maintainers or, worse, actively exploit them for personal gain.

In other words, a position of trust and responsibility in this context--or any
context--includes the requirement to deal honestly, avoid hiding information,
and to prioritize the health of the network and the community over personal
gain.

Those seem like good guidelines even apart from the context of maintaining
software or Dogecoin itself.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Doing the right thing isn't always easy. It's tempting to take a shortcut, and
it's disheartening to see careless or sloppy or unethical people brag about how
quickly they were able to get ahead even if you know they stepped on other
people to get there.

You have your own definition of success and your own rules for living. Your
author hopes to live his own life in such a way that he can wake up every day,
look at the world, and see that it's a little better for his participation in
it. He hopes to go to bed every night, reflect on the day or week or year and
see that he's treated other people fairly and honestly, with kindness.

That doesn't always happen. People make mistakes. Even with the best
intentions, things sometimes go wrong. Perhaps the last final test of ethics is
if you can own up to your mistakes--even unintentional--and do what you can to
set things right.

Keep on doing only good everyday, and may your every day end with the sleep of
the just.
