=head1 Practice Safe Wallet Hygiene

Z<practice_safe_wallet_hygiene>

You're standing in line at a bakery. You're getting ready to defeat a Balrog in
a pinball arcade. You're heading to a concert. You have your phone all loaded
up with enough Dogecoin to get a tasty treat, smack some pinballs, or move to
the music.

Would you pull out a wallet with a million dollars in it to spend $5 on a
pastry and a beverage? Or break a $1000 bill to play four games of pinball? Or
swipe a credit card with a $50,000 limit in a reader held by a teenager in an
orange vest standing outside a stadium?

Hopefully the answer is no. Hopefully the answer is still no if we're talking
Dogecoin and not dollars, because there's an even more important difference
between physical currency and cryptocurrency: your transactions are public with
cryptocurrency, at some level.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Suppose you have 50,080 Doge in your wallet all associated with a single
address, and the doughnut shop has a QR code on the counter. "Just scan it with
your phone and hit send", the clerk says, noticing the Dogecoin pin on your
lapel. The tape's coming up around the edges of the QR code. It's been there
for a while.

The guy behind you in line watches you send your transaction with far too much
interest. He should be eyeing the doughnuts with that much interest.

You grab your buttermilk blueberry bars and walk outside. A moment later, your
phone dings. Your balance is now 50,000 Doge. That's when the sketchy guy bumps
into you and palms your phone, leaving you with doughnuts and some crumbs,
because he knows you have a lot of friendly dog-themed cryptocurrency.

=head3 *Multi-Use Addresses Are Bidirectional Risks

X<obscure references; Sins of Sinister>

What went wrong? On your side, you kept all of your eggs in one basket. Wallet
addresses are free, andN<To the best of our knowledge, cryptographically
speaking, in early 2023!> cryptographically secure. It's so unlikely you'll
accidentally bump into someone else's wallet address that you might as well
guess the coordinates of a specific atom in the entire universe from the big
bangN<You can tell this is unlikely because something like this was a plot
point in an X-Men comic to explain a mutant's overpowered prescience.>

Every time you reuse a wallet address to I<send> funds, you run the risk of
tying your identity to a specific address and all of the addresses used to get
funds out of a coinbase to that address. If you're spending Dogecoin in person,
this risk is higher; you've potentially tied that chain of coin custody to your
physical presence.

=head3 *Multi-Use Addresses Can Be Snooped

What else went wrong? Anyone who knows that your local doughnut shop has
re-used its address can track all transactions I<to> that address. The sketchy
man behind you in line could have looked up the shop's address on a blockchain
explorer, found your transaction (it just happened), then looked up the unspent
transactions of the wallet address you used to pay for your tasty treat.

There's no excuse for any sketchy person to swipe your phone. They own their
bad behavior. Even still, the temptation is there and the ability to do bad
things is multiplied by the shop's poor address hygiene.

Fortunately, this can all be fixed.

=head2 *Limit Your Walking Around Money

Unlike a physical wallet full of $1000 bills, your wallet addresses can only be
unlocked with your private key(s). If they're not on your device or in your head,
someone will have to do a lot more work to get them out of you.

Instead of keeping all of your funds available on instant access by swiping
your finger on your phone, store the bulk of your funds in a more secure
location (see other tips): an offline wallet, a hardware wallet, backed up with
keys not connected to the Internet or available by any easy network access.

A few hundred Doge here and there in various addresses spreads out your
exposure. Losing access to (or having access taken from you for) one address is
still unpleasant, but it's not the catastrophe of losing all your funds.

=head2 *Encourage Vendor Address Hygiene

When you're out and about spending your favorite friendly dog-themed money, pay
attention to vendor practices as well. If you see someone re-usiYng addresses
for purchases, consider taking the time to inform them (gently and kindly)
about the risks of re-using addresses (especially for their customers) and
benefits of address isolation (especially for their customers). You can always
hand them this book, of course.

With the prevalence of HD wallets (L<use_a_hd_wallet>) and other mechanisms to
generate multiple addresses managed by a single key, there's no reason not to
take advantage of the nearly-limitless address space of the blockchain.

Maybe it takes brainstorming, like "Hey, what if you could print a QR code on
the initial receipt?" Other times you might have to get together some
software-minded folks to figure out the right approach, such as generating the
next arcade game's QR code and displaying it in the cabinet's attract mode (see
other tips).

Security is often a balance between convenience and inconvenience. The question
is how far you want to go to protect yourself, your vendors, and your customers
and how much extra effort you need to put into place to keep that protection.
The core developers and advocates can only go so far giving you the tools and
the information you can use to do what you want to do easily and safely. The
rest is up to you.
