=head1 Practice a New Language

Z<practice_a_new_language>

Some people think English is the language of the Internet. It's actually memes,
but they don't know it yet. Until then, it's up to all of us to find ways to
communicate with other people in ways they understand.

The Dogecoin network communicates in terms of numbers: big and small numbers,
all bundled together in blocks and transactions and addresses and Dogecoin and
fractions of Dogecoin. We humans bring meaning to those numbers by agreeing on
what they mean and presenting them in ways we can understand: labels, QR codes,
addresses, secret keys, et cetera.

The Dogecoin Core itself does the same thing. Whether you're a goat farmer in
western Canada, a small business investor in eastern Africa, a polar ice
researcher in Antarctica, or a student studying European finance in Austria,
you balance two important things when you use the Core: what the underlying
information I<means> and how you I<prefer> to consume that information.

In other words, without all this highfalutin' talk, you should be able to read
use the Core in any written language you preferN<Your author recognizes the
irony of writing this whole book in English.>. Good news: more and more people
have that option!

=head2 *Language Setting

X<< Dogecoin Core; C<dogecoin-qt> >>
X<< configuration options; C<lang> >>

Run the C<dogecoin-qt> program and ask for its help output; you'll see an
option called C<--lang>:

=begin screen

  $ B<dogecoin-qt --help>
  ...
  UI Options:

  -lang=<lang>
       Set language, for example "de_DE" (default: system locale)

=end screen

If you've configured your computer to use German spoken in Germany as your
default language, the Core should do the right thing I<if> the developers have
provided the appropriate translations. You should have to do nothing special
with Dogecoin for the software to behave normally.

Suppose instead you're about to go on a trip to Portugal and Brazil and want to
brush up on your Portuguese, so you'd like to manage your transactions in one
or both languages. How do you figure this out?

=head3 *How Language Codes Work

X<obscure references; King George singing>

The example code, C<de_DE>, has two parts. The first is C<de>, which represents
Deutsch, the German language. For more details, see ISO-639-1N<Wikipedia
explains this at U<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1>>. The second part
is C<DE>, which represents the country of Germany, known as Deutschland to its
inhabitants. For more details, see ISO-3166-1N<Wikipedia also explains this at
U<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-2>>. The combination of
language and country code means "German, as spoken in Germany". Similarly,
C<en_US> refers to "English spoken in the United States of America" and
C<en_GB> refers to "English as attempted by the residents of that island we
defeated back in the 18th century"N<"You'll Be Back" not withstanding.>.

This is the ideal behavior, anyhow. If there's no specific UK variant of
English or Canadian variant of English, it's okay for the translation system to
fall back to generic English. Similarly, if there's a Portugese in Portugal
language code C<pt_PT> but no Brazilian Portuguese C<pt_BR>, it's okay to fall
back to Portuguese, even though you'll probably embarrass yourself with
country-specific slang.

How do you know what the Core actually supports? Look at its source codeN<See
U<https://github.com/dogecoin/dogecoin/tree/master/src/qt/locale>> to find a
list of all current translation files. Look for your language code and any
specific country code. If there's a file present, you can use that language.
Otherwise, you'll have to choose something else.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

The biggest risk you face with this technique is fleeting disappointment. Test
this with the C<--help> command to C<dogecoin-qt>:

=begin screen

  $ dogecoin-qt --help --lang=af_ZA
  Gebruikerkoppelvlakopsies:

  ...

  -lang=<lang>
       Set language, for example "de_DE" (default: system locale)

  -resetguisettings
       Alle instellings wat in die grafiese gebruikerkoppelvlak gewysig is,
       terugstel

=end screen

You may find, as in this case, that only some of the text has translations.
Alternately, you may have no translations for your language and/or country.
Think of this as an opportunity, however. This could be your chance to
contribute to the Core and help countless other shibes and potential shibes use
Dogecoin in their own preferred languages!

The other risk is that you inadvertently set a default language to something
you don't understand well enough to disableN<Your author does not admit to
setting the default language on a fleet of French laser printers to Bulgarian
from the United States on accident on the first of April once.>. If this
happens to you, examine your configuration file for the C<lang> setting and
change it to your preferred locale setting. Be aware that, at least as of
1.14.8, using the C<--help> command does not process your configuration file
but instead will use your system's default locale setting.
