=head1 Run a Node

Z<run_a_node>

X<Dogecoin Core>

One of the subtle but essential truths behind Dogecoin is that Dogecoin is what
we all agree it is. While developers have some ability to add features, fix
bugs, and release software for other people to examine, run, modify, and
redistribute, it's the I<network> that decides what actually happens. By
design, everyone who runs a node gets a say in which behaviors are valid or
invalid. For example, the Dogecoin Core 1.14.5 release lowered the default fee
per transaction from 1 Doge per transaction to 0.01 Doge per kilobyte of
transaction size.

You can now take advantage of these fee changes because enough nodes have
adopted the new version that the network supports these lower costs.

The power of the network--what we call I<consensus>--is in the hands of people
who run nodes. That could be you.

=head2 *What You Need

What do you need to run a node? A computer. Some memory. An Internet
connection. Persistent storage. The willingness to do some research and keep
things up to date. Patience. A kind heart.

In specific, you need a relatively modern computer (a decent desktop or laptop
machine manufactured in the past 10 years will work). As of this writing in
April 2023, a full node requires over 60 GB of free hard drive space. The size
of that requirement will grow in the future. 4 GB of RAM will help. Windows,
Linux, and Mac OS X are all supported.

=begin tip Are you a node-half full person?

X<concepts; full node>
X<concepts; partial node>

What's the difference between a full node and a partial node? If your node
stores the entire blockchain history from the first block mined until today,
you have a full node. Otherwise you have a partial node.

While running a partial node saves disk space and provides some benefit to the
network, full nodes are essential to verify every transaction and to help other
full nodes come online. If you can spare the space, running a full node is a
great contribution.

=end tip

=head2 *Find the Right Software

As of this writing, C<dogecoin.com>N<See U<https://dogecoin.com/>.> and
C<github.com/dogecoin/dogecoin>N<See U<https://github.com/dogecoin/dogecoin>.>
are two reputable sources which both announce new Dogecoin Core releases and
provide download links to Dogecoin Core releases. Depending on when you read
this, one or both of those URLs may have changed--probably not, but it's
possible--so do some research to figure out what's reputable.

From a verifiable source, download the distribution that best matches your
operating system. For example, if you're running Windows on Intel or AMD
hardware (not ARM), look for a C<win64> bundle. For Mac, look for the C<osx>
bundle. For Linux, look for the C<linux> bundle that best matches your
processor bundle. Then verify the download (see L<verify_core_releases>). If
something looks suspicious or seems off, stop! Do some research. Figure out
what went weird, then decide if and how you want to try again.

After you unpack the software (Windows has an installer or a zip file, Mac OS X
has a DMG file, Linux users get tarballs), you'll end up with a couple of
alternatives. Do you want to run a GUI or a background process?

X<< Dogecoin Core; C<dogecoin-cli> >>
X<< Dogecoin Core; C<dogecoind> >>

This book assumes you'll run the GUI but have access to the other files: a
command-line interface called C<dogecoin-cli> and the background process
C<dogecoind>.

=begin tip Are There More Details?

If these rules seem like they assume too much knowledge you don't have yet, or
if things look very different in the future, look for a Dogepedia entry called
"Operate a Dogecoin Node"N<Currently at
U<https://dogecoin.com/dogepedia/how-tos/operating-a-node/>.>. That guide goes
into more detail and, because it's a website, can be updated when things change
more quickly than a printed book can.

=end tip

=head2 *Configure Your Node

When you first start your node, you may see a prompt asking you where to store
configuration information, logs, and persistent data such as your wallet and
the blockchain. Take note of this.

=over 4

=item * On Linux, BSD, and other Unix-like systems, the default is F<$HOME/.dogecoin/>

=item * On Windows, the default is F<%APPDATA%\Dogecoin>

=item * On Mac OS, the default is F<$HOME/Library/Application Support/Dogecoin>

=back

You can change these if you like, but you run the risk of confusion. On the
other hand, if you need the hard drive space elsewhere, changing this directory
can be useful--so weigh the pros and cons.

After you have your node up and running, you'll have to wait a while to
download the entire blockchain and store it on your disk. This can be a good
time to start a new hobby or polish your skills with an existing one, such as
reading a book, knitting a warm pair of socks, or baking a delicious pear
galette. The secret to the latter is ginger and brown sugar.

You can also spend some time configuring your node.

For example, in the GUI, click on Settings then Options then Network. Click the
box for "Allow incoming connections". Without this, your node will only receive
data, never transmit. That can be useful to you, but it's not useful to the
network. Be aware that you may have to do some work on your own network setup
to finish the task, however: your node needs to be reachable from the public
Internet on port 22556, and your machine needs a reliable IP address from your
DHCP server.

Sometimes clicking the "Allow UPnP" box in the network tab in the Core GUI will
fix this. Sometimes it won't. If this seems like Star Trek-style technobabble
to you, that's fine. Everyone has to learn things sometime. Ask a friend, do
some research, learn the implications of what this means and then decide if you
want to continue. It's okay to stop at this point for a while; you can still
I<use> a node running on your own even if you don't or can't allow incoming
connections.

Skim some of the other configuration options. They all have their uses, and
subsequent tips in this book will cover some of the most important. Do be aware
that you will have to restart your node to take advantage of them, so pick a
time when that's least disruptive.

Do make note of your configuration and data storage directory however. You'll
use this a lot throughout the rest of the book.

=head2 *Alternatives

You don't need a desktop computer or laptop. You could run a VM in the cloud.
Various service providers such as Amazon AWS, Google GCP, Microsoft Azure, and
Oracle Cloud offer free introductory packages as well as modestly-priced
services, depending on your definition of "modest". You'll need some degree of
system administration and automation skills to set up and run a node with these
services, especially if you're sensitive to price caps and spending limits.

At the risk of referring to something that seems exciting (at the time of
writing) but hasn't shipped a tangible result yet (at the time of writing), a
do-it-yourself hardware project under the umbrella of very dot
engineerN<Seriously, see U<https://very.engineer/>.> is attempting to assemble
a known-working combination of hardware and software to run a full node with
small form-factor computers, solar power, and goat-resistant
networkingN<Possibly other livestock too. Perhaps even birds.>.

If you're good with a soldering iron or flashing bootloaders or comparing spec
sheets for all-in-one processor boards, check that project for more details.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Running a node has a few risks.

First, it's a commitment of time and resources. Depending on the speed of your
hardware and network connection, it could take a few days to download all of
the blockchain. Depending on how well-connected your node is to other nodes,
you could send dozens of gigabytes of data over your connection every month.
Depending on your hardware, you could see a measurable increase in your power
bill. Before you start running a node, consider what you can commit to now and
measure carefully the effects; take care of yourself first before the network.

Second, remember that running a network service like a Dogecoin Core node means
you'll receive traffic from all over the Internet and you'll send traffic all
over the Internet. While the Internet is full of wonderful, selfless people
like everyone running Core nodes, it has its share of malicious people (some
deliberately, some unknowingly), so keep your security practices up to date.
Invest time and effort into a good firewall, monitor for suspicious activity,
and don't perform any actions you haven't researched and vetted.

Third, keep your node secure (L<authenticate_rpc_securely>, for example) and
your wallet safe (L<work_without_a_wallet>, for example). You can do a lot of
interesting things with a Core node, but many of those interesting things are a
lot more interesting when only you can do them. Otherwise they're more scary
than interesting.

Finally, remember to keep your node up to date. Core releases add new features,
of course, but they also fix bugs, add more configuration options, and improve
security. One important thread in development philosophy is to give
users--people who run nodes like you are considering--the ability to shape the
behavior of Dogecoin and its network. To do this responsibly, you need to
understand what and how you can contribute your vision of Dogecoin.
