=head1 Securely Back Up Your Wallet

Z<securely_back_up_your_wallet>

X<wallet>
X<Dogecoin Core; wallet>

While all of the settled Dogecoin transactions in the world are kept in the
public ledger (that's the Dogecoin blockchain), your ability to send coins from
any of your addresses depends on your ability to access the private keys kept
in your wallet. Your wallet is a list of private and public keys, labels for
the associated addresses, and a little bit of metadata. That's the most
important thing you can keep track of and protect.

The security if your coins is the security of your wallet is the security your
private keys. This expresses itself in two ways:

=over 4

=item * you need to retain your ability to access those keys

=item * you need to keep other people from getting those keys

=back

In other words, keep your wallet available and keep it safe. You can achieve
the former by making a backup.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

If you have only a single copy of your wallet, the thing (computer, USB key,
laminated paper in a safety deposit box) containing that wallet has a physical
risk of theft, destruction, or data exfiltration. Hard drives die, cats knock
laptops off of bookshelves, and USB keys go through laundry. Maybe your hard
drive will grind to a halt. Maybe you'll spill a glass of orange juice on your
laptop during a hearty breakfastN<Your author has, of course, I<never> done
this. It was lunch.>.

Having multiple copies of essential data is a good disaster recovery mechanism.
Maybe you're being sufficiently cautious during an upgrade of the Core version.
Maybe you want a copy stored on a USB key in a safe deposit box in a bank.

Losing your wallet doesn't mean your coins are gone, but it may mean you no
longer have access to them. Making a backup of your wallet gives you the
ability to I<restore> your access to your keys, which restores your access to
your coins.

Creating and securing a backup reduces the risk of losing your single mechanism
of accessing your coins, but it increases the risk that other people may gain
access to your backup. If you give a USB key with your wallet to your brother
in law, the neighbor kid down the street, and your estate planner, then your
ability to get the file when you need it is your access problem. Their ability
to keep your file secure is now your security problem.

Similarly, if you upload a backup to a cloud provider, their security is your
risk and their ability to lock you out of your files is your access problem.

What can you do?

=head3 *Dogecoin GUI Backups

If you're running the Dogecoin Core GUI with a recent enough release (as of
this writing, version 1.14.6), use the File -> Backup Wallet menu item to
launch a window that allows you to select the location and name of a wallet
backup file.

If you do this, your system will think for a moment, write out the file, then
pop up a notification telling you that your backup is complete (see
L<figure-dogecoin-core-backup-wallet-gui>).

=begin figure Dogecoin Core Backup GUI Notification

Z<figure-dogecoin-core-backup-wallet-gui>

F<images/dogecoin-core-backup-wallet-gui>

=end figure

X<< Dogecoin Core; C<wallet.dat> >>

B<Protect this file.> It's the same as the F<wallet.dat> file in your Dogecoin
configuration directory.

X<data formats; BDB>
X<data formats; SQLite>
X<< external programs; C<sqlite> >>

If you open the file in a file editor, you'll see bunch of binary data.  This
file uses a well-known format called Berkeley Database (BDB). Bitcoin,
Litecoin, and Dogecoin have used this format for yearsN<They will likely both
move to a format known as SQLite, which is even easier to work with in some
ways.>. Anyone who can read this file can read its contents. You need something
more secure.

=head3 *Encrypted F<wallet.dat> Backups

Back in the GUI, go to the Settings -> Encrypt Wallet menu. If you haven't used
this before, it will pop up a dialog that allows you to select a phrase to use
to encrypt your wallet.

=begin tip Good Encryption Phrases

A good encryption phrase balances memorability with privacy. Just like with
passwords, short and/or easily-guessable phrases are bad (C<password>, C<1234>,
C<s3kr1t>). Experts often suggest using memorable quotes then modifying them
with typos, substitutions, and enhancements.

X<obscure references; John Rox>
X<obscure references; Gayla Peevey>
X<obscure references; Skeptopotamus>
X<obscure references; Pokey the Penguin>

For example, use a line from a song, add spice, and throw people off. If you're
a John Rox/Gayla Peevey fan, maybe C<I want a hippopotamus for Christmas> could
remix with Pokey the Penguin to become C<I want a skeptopotamus for Christmas
3:-]>, something that's much more difficult for anyone to guess.

=end tip

With this encryption in place, you'll need to enter the passphrase to do
anything with the wallet, so now you have I<two> things to keep track of: your
wallet itself and your passphrase. Anyone--including you--who has hold of one
has to get hold of the other to do anything with either. This is the price and
benefit of additional security.

=head3 *Dogecoin RPC Backups

X<< RPC commands; C<backupwallet> >>
X<< RPC commands; C<encryptwallet> >>

You can achieve the same outcomes with the CLI/RPC tools. For example, the
C<dogecoin-cli> utility supports the C<backupwallet> RPC command. Give it the
name of a file, and it will back up your wallet to a file of that name within
the configured backups directory (by default, F<.dogecoin/backups/>)N<This is
the behavior as of 1.14.6.>). See L<figure-dogecoin-cli-backup-wallet>.
Similarly, the C<encryptwallet> RPC command can add a passphrase to a wallet.

=begin figure Dogecoin Core CLI Backups

Z<figure-dogecoin-cli-backup-wallet>

F<images/dogecoin-cli-backup-wallet.png>

=end figure

Because C<dogecoin-cli> is an RPC client, anything you can use to send RPC
commands to a Core node can send a C<backupwallet> or C<encryptwallet> command.

=head2 *What Can You Do With This?

Where can you store backups that they're safe? Wherever you can easily access
the files when you need them and where other people can't.

What reduces your risk that other people can do bad things with your data if
they do get your backups? Encryption.

How do you secure your passphrase? Choose something meaningful but not
guessable. Make sure it's secure and kept away from your backups. Make it
possible for someone you trust to help you restore it in case of an emergency.

Above all, keep a cool head. Think about what could go wrong, and choose your
risks appropriately. Make a plan and test it. You'll discover flaws and
benefits that allow you to revise your plan before something goes wrong.
