=head1 Set Your Node Comment

Z<set_your_node_comment>

X<< Dogecoin Core; C<dogecoind> >>
X<< Dogecoin Core; C<dogecoin-qt> >>

Look at the network peers tab in your core wallet (Help -> Debug -> Peers, in
the Qt GUI as of the current 1.14.9 release). You'll see a list of other nodes
you've connected to, along with like their IP addresses (IPv4 or IPv6), the
amount of data sent and received, and more.

That additional data includes a node version string. By defaultN<In the
Dogecoin Core source code, look for a value called C<CLIENT_NODE>.>, every
Dogecoin Core reports itself as C<Shibetoshi/version>. This applies whether
you're running C<dogecoind> as a headless network service or C<dogecoin-qt> as
a GUI application or some other way of running the Core that we haven't
invented yet.

=begin notetip Be Cautious

The source code has a comment that says, in effect, "Use the same C<Shibetoshi>
string for all kinds of invocations so that no one can look at a node and
realize if it's running with a GUI or not or which operating system et cetera".
This is a security feature; if there were a bug in the GUI that a malicious
hacker could exploit remotely and if the default version string revealed
information about the way a node's owner ran it, the attacker would have an
easier time getting a list of potential targets. Remember this principle!

=end notetip

X<< Dogecoin Core; configuration; C<uacomment> >>

The Core allows you to I<append> text to this version string to customize your
node, amuse yourself, and, potentially, brighten someone's day through a
feature called C<uacomment>.

=head2 *Setting C<uacomment>

To customize this feature, you need to edit your F<dogecoin.conf> configuration
file and add an entry:

=begin programlisting

  uacomment=My Cool Node

=end programlisting

Of course, you can and should pick something more interesting than that. As it
currently stands, you have 256 characters to play with hereN<This is defined as
C<MAX_SUBVERSION_LENGTH> in the source code. Check the source for the version
you're running to see if this has changed.>.

Save this file, then launch or restart your node. If you're running the Qt GUI,
look at the debug information window under "User Agent" (Help -> Debug ->
Information). The text you see there will be broadcast to other nodes whenever
they connect to your node, so this is your chance to make a mark and do
something meaningful.

=head2 *Setting a I<Secure> UA Comment

Of course, this is your node broadcasting something potentially specific to you,
so remember that you're broadcasting it to an entire Internet full of people, some
of whom may not have your best interests at heart.

When you're choosing what to say, keep at least two important points in mind:

=over 4

=item * Be Kind

=item * Be Safe

=back

If you're thinking of setting a comment that might hurt someone's feelings or
cause drama like "Patrick is a curmudgeon!N<He'll probably agree, so this is the
worst thing I wanted to put in print.>", think twice. There are human beings on
the other side of the Internet, and our funny dog money only works if we all
work together and cooperate.

If you're thinking of setting a comment that might reveal personal or private
information about you or someone else, like "Proudly hosted at 1 Chome-2
Dōgenzaka, Shibuya City", think twice, then three and four times. Personal
information can make you or anyone else a target. A visit in person or
electronically from someone who doesn't have everyone's best interest at heart
goes against the spirit of fun and collaboration.

What makes a I<good> comment? If you follow those three rules, then anything
goes.

X<obscure references; Swedish Chef>

You could use a dopey joke, like "Why does the Swedish Chef love Dogecoin?
Because it goes bork bork bork!"

You could advertise your Doge-related project, like "Check out IfDogeThenWow!"

You could brag a little about your uptime, like "Proudly serving the network
since 2013."

The sky is the limit, as long as you're smart about it.
