=head1 Tip a Geocache

Z<tip_a_geocache>

Back in the day, ages ago, to get where you wanted to go, you either had to
have someone give you directions (people did this over the phone, and phones
had cords connected to the wall) or plan your route with a paper map. Sure, a
few hundred GPS satellites launched by the end of 1978, but you had to be
really into satellites and coordinates to use them.

Then hand-held receivers appeared and became popular. Then phones became
smaller and smarter and more capable. You may now be reading about Dogecoin on
a device that can know exactly where in the world you are.  Now you can get
directions from almost anywhere in a populated area to almost anywhere else in
a populated area (and many unpopulated areas too) with a few taps on a phone.

New technology adoption happens that way. Things start slow, with gradual
adoption of weird or scary or complicated things that start to seem normal when
cool and fun and useful applications arrive. That happened with GPS. It could
happen with Dogecoin as well.

=head2 *What is Geocaching?

Geocaching is a kind of collective scavenger hunt where people hide containers
("caches") and then post clues and coordinates to help others find them. Caches
can be in busy urban areas (like a park) or in the middle of nowhere (like a
forest). They can be small (an empty pill bottle or film canister) or large (a
multi-liter bucket).

Visit U<https://www.geocaching.com/play> to learn more about geocaching,
including a free app for your phone to track clues and log your progress.

Larger caches often contain a log book, where people sign their names to record
that they deciphered the clues. Many of these larger caches also include small
take-and-replace trinkets, for a take one, leave one approach. These trinkets
can be stickers, tiny plastic toys, or even low-denomination coins from far-off
countries. This suggests an opportunity.

=head2 *What is a Paper Wallet?

Most of this book assumes you're going to keep your Dogecoin in some kind of
electronic wallet, such as the Dogecoin Core or a hardware wallet. Many tips
also repeat the fact that a wallet is only one way to keep track of private
keys and addresses. If you know the addresses that hold your Dogecoin I<and>
you have a way to represent those keys, you can access your funds even if your
private keys aren't accessible through any hardware or software wallet.

If you lose your keys I<everywhere> you lose your Dogecoin.

X<concepts; paper wallet>

A paper wallet is a piece of paper containing data such as a Dogecoin address,
private key, and QR code representing that key; it's a way to share that
private key and address with someone else so they can claim the unspent funds
for that address. It can be an effective way to give someone their first
Dogecoin--such as tucking a piece of paper into a birthday card for your niece
on her thirteenth birthday and proving you're the coolest aunt/uncle/relative
ever.

To print a paper wallet with the Dogecoin Core, launch the GUI, then go to the
File menu and select Print Paper Wallets. This will pop up a window showing
what you're about to print: a single page image with a happy Dogecoin logo, a
QR code, a line where you can write the number of Doge you sent to the address,
and the private key/address.

When you print this page, you'll receive a prompt to send Dogecoin to the
address to I<fund> the wallet. To give your niece a cool 1000 Birthday
Dogecoin, you must transfer that amount to the address shown on the paper
wallet. Follow the prompts.

B<Note:> your Core will not store the private key of this wallet. The Core
generates a new private key and immediately discards it after you print the
wallet. Any funds you send there will need the private key, so if you lose the
paper, you lose the funds. If someone gets the paper but loses it or doesn't
know what it is or destroys it, the funds are gone too. For anyone to redeem
the funds, they must add the private key to a wallet that can access the funds
immediately.

=head2 *Put a Paper Wallet in a Cache

How do you tie these two ideas together? Print a paper wallet and fund it with
a nominal amount of coins. Most trinkets you find in caches are worth less than
a dollar, so (at current prices of about $0.10 USD per Dogecoin), 5 or 10
Dogecoin is a nice start.

Write out some basic instructions (like "Scan the QR code to claim your
Dogecoin!" and "Take and scan this paper immediately!" or even "Hey, look at
this cool website/FAQ/book for more information!") and put the paper in a
sealed plastic baggie to protect it from the elements.

Now you have two choices. Either make your own cache or find an existing cache
and leave the paper as a trinket for someone else to find. The nice part about
making a new cache is the fun of making a puzzle (see L<host_a_treasure_hunt>
for a variant idea you could mash up with this), but the nice part about
randomly leaving a paper wallet as a trinket here and there is that the point
I<isn't> for people to find cryptocurrency, it's for people to I<stumble across
Dogecoin serendipitously>, discover its value, and find their own utility in
the coin and community.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Depending on the geocache, the location, and the weather, water or dirt or mold
or curious critters could get ruin the paper wallet. Hopefully someone finds
the cache first, but there's always the risk that the coins could be lost
forever.

Depending on how often and where you leave these tips, you could inadvertently
reveal your personal information (name, approximate location, regular travel
routes, et cetera) and that of anyone who redeems one of your wallets. If
someone recognizes what the paper wallet represents, leaves it in place, and
signs their moniker to the log, they can return later and see other log entries
and narrow down who might have taken the wallet. If they scanned the paper,
they have the keys to the wallet and can do anything with the transactions.

Even if they didn't scan the paper, they can now tie a list of names to a
wallet address and monitor all transactions to and from that address.

It's up to the person who takes the wallet I<paper> to practice good
transaction security by immediately transferring the funds to a new and secure
wallet address. As with any paper wallet you weren't immediately and directly
handed by someone you'd trust with your wallet address, treat the wallet as
potentially hostile.

Finally, some people might see the chance to add a few more Dogecoin to their
holdings as a personal challenge and try to find all the wallets you leave.
That might go against your purpose in randomly tipping strangers who might have
never encountered Dogecoin before. Think about what you want to
achieve--hopefully brightening someone's day and inviting them to try something
new, enjoyable, and liberating--and if your actions are likely to achieve that.
