=head1 Track Blockchain Sizes

Z<track_blockchain_sizes>

While a core feature of Dogecoin is that no one has to ask anyone else's
permission to participate, your ability to participate may have a cost. If you
run a node or a miner, it'll cost you electricity, bandwidth, disk space, and
any maintenance you need to perform to keep things running. Sometimes this is a
thankless task, but it helps you and the community.

What does it take to make the network work? We can measure that!

=head2 *Count All the Unspent Transactions

Other tips have explained how important the entire blockchain is essential to
proving that any given transaction belongs or doesn't belong to the network
(see L<forge_a_chain>, for example). Even though every block in the chain
validates every chain which occurs after it, some blocks and transactions
supersede others. Any transaction where the recipients have spent all the
outputs (see L<bundle_and_track_transactions>) is useful for verifying
historical accuracy, but it's not essential for checking the validity of any
new proposed transaction.

X<concepts; UTXOs>

In other words, to validate a new transaction, the network has to prove that
its inputs (the coins it proposes to spend) all come from unspent outputs of
existing transactions. You may hear these referred to as I<UTXO>s, or Unspent
Transaction Outputs. A node doesn't have to track every transaction or block
everywhere to validate any new transaction; it only has to track all UTXOs.

The set of all UTXOs grows and shrinks over time. If you receive 10,000 Doge
from mining a block and then create two transactions, one sending 5,000 Doge to
your cold wallet and another sending 5,000 to your favorite Uncle Oscar, you've
replaced one transaction with unspent outputs (the coinbase transaction) with
two (one to your cold wallet and another to Oscar).

If you've received a hundred tips to a wallet address and you decide to sweep
them all to a cold wallet in one transaction, you may replace 100 UTXOs with
oneN<Note that this example doesn't account for transaction fees paid to
miners.>.

X<< RPC commands; C<gettxoutsetinfo> >>

There's no I<theoretical> limit to the total number of UTXOs that can exist.
Instead there's a I<practical> limit of how many the average node can store.
Want to see what's currently happening in the network? Use the
C<gettxoutsetinfo> RPC command to inspect the I<current> set of UTXOs. This
will take several seconds to return, but you'll get a result resembling:

=begin screen

  {
    "height": 4667058,
    "bestblock": "5fe7bc...",
    "transactions": 8281767,
    "txouts": 17644750,
    "bytes_serialized": 769053979,
    "hash_serialized": "eae241...",
    "total_amount": 138843085485.95428675
  }

=end screen

This output means that there are 8.28 million transactions with unspent outputs
and 17.64 million unspent outputs in those transactions. There are 138.843
billion (billion with a b) Dogecoin available for spending in those unspent
outputs.

=head2 *Count All the Dogecoin

Want to know how many Dogecoin are available? You just did! Great work!

=head2 *Measure Disk and Memory Consumption

X<< RPC commands; C<getmemoryinfo> >>

Disk space and memory aren't free. What does it cost to run a node? For
example, how much memory does your node use to track UTXOs? It's not easy to
get I<exact> numbers, but use C<getmemoryinfo> for a hint:

=begin screen

  {
    "locked": {
      "used": 14687328,
      "free": 254880,
      "total": 14942208,
      "locked": 14942208,
      "chunks_used": 458979,
      "chunks_free": 3
    }
  }

=end screen

This node is using 14,687,328 bytes of memory and has access to 14,942,208
bytes of memory. Of course, if you're running the GUI, you'll need more than
that, but this is a start of an estimate.

How much disk space are you using? Again, an exact example is difficult to get.
With Dogecoin Core 1.14.x, the C<bytes_serialized> value from
C<gettxoutsetinfo> shows the size in bytes of the UTXO set as stored on disk,
more or less. In newer versions of Dogecoin Core (1.21.x and newer), this will
single value become C<bogosize> and C<disk_size>, and will be slightly more
accurate. In the previous example, the Core returned a value of 769,053,979
bytes, or around 7.7 MB on disk.

If you're running a node, you can use your operating system's file utilities to
get a better sense of how much space on disk your node uses to store the
blockchain. As of this writing in early April 2023, a full node consumes about
64 GB (gigabytesN<That's gigabytes with a hard-g, not a soft-g like GIF.>) of
disk space.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Besides the risks of running a Core node that may lead you to separate your
wallet from the node, be aware that you're going to need RAM, disk space, and
bandwidth to participate in the network. These aren't free. Neither is
electricity. Your participation is valuable--essential, even. Without multiple,
cooperating parties, the risk to the blockchain is that one or a few bad actors
could control all of the transactions.

Consider how much you're willing to invest in keeping Dogecoin independent and
permissionless, and use what you've learned here to monitor what's happening on
a regular basis, lest any changes catch you by surprise.
