=head1 Watch Wallet Addresses

Z<watch_wallet_addresses>

One of the complicated (and valuable) features about blockchains is that all
transactions are public. Anyone, anywhere can review any transaction and trace
the lineage of its inputs back to one or more coinbase transactions. They may
have to put work into it, but the coherence of the entire chain is observable.

Security is important when it comes to your own computer too. While it's most
secure to run a core node without a wallet attached (see
L<work_without_a_wallet>), sometimes you absolutely must have a Core node with
knowledge of the transactions that are important to you--transactions where you
care about sending or receiving Dogecoin.

You run two risks with a wallet attached to a Core node. First, anyone who can
access your node has a better chance of being able to get your private keys,
and thus the ability to spend your unspent transactions. Second, anyone who can
see the addresses you care about may be able to track your transactions back to
you.

Securing your computer overall helps with both risks. Working without a wallet
addresses the first risk, but it makes the second risk moot by taking away your
ability to track interesting transactions.

Fortunately, there's a way to have the latter while reducing the exposure of
your private keys.

=head2 *Watch-Only Addresses

X<concepts; watch-only address>

Dogecoin Core borrowed a Bitcoin Core feature where you can import an address
to your wallet. You can't send or receive funds from or to it, but the Core
will index all transactions to and from the address and let you query them.  A
I<watch-only address> is an address in your wallet--an address for which the
Core tracks transactions--without an associated private key. You may have the
public key or the address only, so the Core knows that you care about all
transactions to or from that address. Without the public key, you have no way
of spending any funds sent to that address.

This can be handy when you care more about tracking than you do spending. For
example, if you run a pinball arcade or charge people 5 Dogecoin for admission
into your goat petting farm, your ability to see transaction confirmation as
soon as possible is more important than your ability to spend immediately. You
can always use a full wallet later when it comes time to buy pinball wax or
goat food.

What's the difference between watching an address and watching a key? Remember
the order in which you can derive data! Given a secret key or passphrase, you
I<can> derive a private key. You I<cannot> go backwards. Given a private key,
you can derive a public key. You cannot go backwards. Given a public key, you
can derive an address. You cannot go backwards.

=head2 *Watch-a-Bunch

If you've dumped your wallet and extracted a bunch of addresses (see
L<export_wallet_data>), the rest of the tip might seem easy. Before you go
further, you must understand that the Core must process a transaction for your
wallet to know that a transaction has affected it. How do you know which
transactions to process? You have to examine every block containing a relevant
transaction. How do you know which blocks are relevant?

Either you already know this, or you need to ask the Core to rescan enough of
the chain to pick up every transaction you care about.

X<< RPC commands; C<importpubkey> >>

The C<importpubkey> RPC command adds a public key to a Core wallet in
watch-only mode. Any addresses derived from these public keys get watched for
transactions, but you can't spend any unspent transaction inputs until you
create new transactions with the appropriate private keys.

This command has one required and three optional arguments. You I<must> provide
a valid public key. You I<may> provide, in order, a string label to attach to
the address of this key, a true or false value whether to rescan the blockchain
after importing the key (defaulting to true, always rescan), and (as of
Dogecoin 1.14.7), an integer value representing the height of the block from
which to start scanning. If you provide no height but do request a rescan, or
if you're using an earlier version of the Core, this command will scan the
entire blockchain from the genesis block with height 1.

This can take a while.

X<< RPC commands; C<importaddress> >>

If you don't have a public key but you do have an address--such as the Dogecoin
Developer tipjarN<C<9xEP9voiNLw7Y7DS87M8QRqKM43r6r5KM5>>, as shown at
U<https://foundation.dogecoin.com/announcements/2022-12-31-corefund/>, you can
watch that with the C<importaddress> command, which behaves similarly to the
public key import command.

=begin screen

  $ B<dogecoin-cli importaddress 9xEP9voi...>

=end screen

X<addresses; watchonly>

When the rescanning process finishes, if you asked for it, you will see all
transactions to the watched address as if they were transactions to your own
wallet addresses. Any RPC command or other query you make of the Core can see
these addresses and transactions. Look for parameters to these queries to
include or exclude "watchonly transactions" or "watchonly addresses" to
disambiguate funds under your control from funds associated with addresses you
imported.

=begin tip What's the Right Height?

To be extra safe, you can rescan from the genesis block which has a height of
one. That's guaranteed to give you good answers. To do less work, use a block
explorer to see the I<earliest> block in which a transaction to a given wallet
occurred.

If you've extracted your own wallet addresses, use the block height of your
oldest transaction. You'll save yourself computing power and time: scanning the
older blocks will find nothing relevant to your interests.

=end tip

=head2 *Script Your Watching

Given a list of wallet public keys, you can script a series of commands to
import every address. There are a couple of approaches:

=over 4

=item * Write a program to loop through the keys and make RPC calls directly
against a Core node

=item * Write a program to loop through the keys and invoke `dogecoin-cli` for
each key

=item * Write a program to write a list of commands and copy and paste that
into the Qt Debug Console (see L<command_the_core>)

=back

X<< RPC commands; C<importaddress> >>

Any of these approaches will work. All are straightforward depending on your
preference. You can do the same thing with wallet I<addresses> too, if you swap
the RPC command for C<importaddress>.

=head2 *Understand the Risks

Be mindful of a couple of things. First, any address or key you add to a
watch-only wallet reveals something to anyone who can get access to your node.
Sure, you and a few hundred thousand of your closest Doge-friendly friends may
be watching the developer tipjar or suspected whale wallets to see what's going
on, but if you've set up a consulting operation and you don't particularly want
the general public to see that your hard work has netted you a sweet 10k Doge
windfall, consider what kind of security you want to have on hand to avoid
leaking information.

Even though you can't I<spend> these funds (because the wallet doesn't have the
private keys), anyone who gets your wallet can see what you're watching. Keep
your files safe and private!

Also remember that rescanning the entire blockchain can take time and
resources, and has a good chance of preventing you from doing other work with
your node until the rescan finishes. Take advantage of the optional rescan
height argument, when possible.

Furthermore, every address or key you watch will take up space in your wallet.
If your wallet size gets too big to back up encrypted on a USB key (see
L<securely_back_up_your_wallet>) because you watched every address you could
find, you'll have to find an alternate approach.

X<< RPC commands; C<rescan> >>

Alternately, skip rescanning if you're importing a lot of addresses or keys by
explicitly providing a false parameter to the rescan option. When you've
finished importing everything, use the C<rescan> command explicitly with the
lowest block height that will cover everything you've imported. This command is
new to Dogecoin Core as of 1.14.6, so you can feel a little special knowing
that you have a feature other similar blockchains either don't have or
borrowedN<They're welcome to borrow it! Isn't it nice to know that Dogecoin did
something to make everyone's lives easier?>.
